B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
 
Department of Mathematics  
 
Syllabus   
 
Semester:  III 
Course : Fourier Transform , Mathematical  logic  and Advanced Linear Algebra  
Course Code: 24MAC131 (Common to CSE, ISE, AIML)  
L:T:P:J  2:2:0:0  CIA                     :   50 
Credits:  03 SEA                     :       50 
Hours:  40 SEA Duration     :  03 Hours  
 
Course Learning Objectives: The students will be able to  
1 Have  an insight into Fourier series, Fourier tran sforms.  
2 Develop  knowledge of Fundamentals of logic  and Relations, Vector Spaces, Linear Transformation & 
Inner product spaces  arising in engineering  
Module -1: Fourier Series  & Fourier Transforms  No. of 
hours Blooms 
cognitive 
Levels  
Examples from Engineering  that require Fourier series and Fourier Transforms . 
Fourier  series : Periodic functions, Introduction to Fourier Series, Dirichlet’s 
condition. Problems on Fourier series  over 
).,(ll  
Fourier  Transforms:  Introduction to infinite Fourier  transform, Fourier sine and 
cosine transform and properties, problems  on infinite Fourier transform, Discrete & 
Fast Fourier transform.  
Experiential Learning component:  Finding the Fourier series and Fourier Transform of 
a function  L : 04  
T : 04 L1 
L2 
L3 
Module -2: Mathematical  logic and Boolean Algebra    
Examples from Engineering  that require Fundamentals of logic and Relations . 
Mathematical logic : Basic connectives and truth tables, logic equivalence - the laws 
of logic, logical implication - rules of inference  
Boolean Algebra : Boolean functions,  Representation of Boolean functions , Logic 
gates, minimization of circuits.  
Experiential Learning compon ent: Construction of combinational and sequential  circuit . L : 04  
T : 04  L1 
L2 
L3 
Module -3: Vector Spaces    
Examples from Engineering  that require vector spaces  
Recap of system of linear homogenous and non -homogeneous equation  and solution 
sets.  Vector  spaces, subspaces, linear ly independen t and dependen t, Linear span of a 
set, Basis and dimension, coordinat e vectors.  
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on  linearly independent and dependent  
vectors , basis and dimension  of a vector space.  L : 04  
T : 04 L1 
L2 
L3 
Module -4:Linear Transformation    
Examples from Engineering  that require linear transformation . 
Linear transformations, algebra of linear transformations, representation of 
transformations by matrices,  Non-singular  linear transformation, Inverse  of a linear 
transformation, Range space, Null space and problems on Rank -nullity theorem.   
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on Inverse of a linear transformation and 
Rank -nullity theorem  L : 04  
T : 04  L1 
L2 
L3 
Module -5: Inner Product Spaces    
Examples from Engineering  that require Inner product spaces . 
Inner product s Inner product spaces, Orthogonal  set, orthogonal projections, 
orthono rmal bases, Gram -Schmidt process, QR -factorization, Recap of Eigen values 
and Eigen vectors , probl ems on Singular value decomposition.  
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on QR-factorization and singular value 
decomposition   L : 04  
T : 04  L1 
L2 
L3 
 
Course Outcomes: After completing the course, the students will be able to  
CO1 : Apply  Fourier series  & transform concepts in data visualization and cryptography . 
CO2:  Convert Boolean expressions to logic gates and vice -versa . 
CO3:  Apply the knowledge of vector spaces for solving problems in arising in engineering field  
CO4:  Apply the knowledge of linear transform for solving problems in arising in image processing  
CO5:  Compute orthogonal and orthonormal bases of  vectors and decomposition of a symmetric matrix 
using standard technique.  
 
 
 
CO - PO Mapping:  
COs  PO1  PO2  PO3  PO4  PO5  PO6  PO7  PO8  PO9  PO10  PO11  PO12  
CO 1  3 2   2        
CO 2  3 2   2        
CO 3  3 2   2        
CO 4  3 2   2        
CO 5  3 2   2        
 
 
Reference Books:  
1. E. Kreyszig: “Advanced Engineering Mathematics ”, John Wiley & Sons,10th Edition (Reprint), 2016.  
2. B. S. Grewal: “Higher Engineering Mathematics ”, Khanna Publishers, 44th Ed., 2017.  
3. C. Ray Wylie, Louis C.Barrett : “Advanced Engineering Mathematics", 6" Edition, 2. McGraw -Hill 
Book Co., New York, 1995.  
4. James Stewart : “Calculus —Early Transcendenta ls”, Cengage Learning India Private Ltd., 2017.  
5. Srimanta Pal & Subo dh C Bhunia: “Engineering Mathematics”, Oxford University Press, 3"Reprint, 
2016.  
6. David C. Lay, Steven R. Lay and J. J. McDonald “Linear Algebra and its applications”, 3rd Edition, 
Pearson Education Ltd., 2017.  
7. Kenneth H Rosen, “ Discrete  Mathematics and its Applications,  Special Indian  Edition  2021 ,                     
McGraw Hill publication  (India) . 
8. Ralph P. Grimaldi, “ Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics, 5th Edition, Pearson Education  2004.  
Web links and Video Lectures:  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106111  
2. https://youtu.be/OynpZwylau8  
3. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/111/106/111106051/  
4. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvRdbPMEMUI  
5. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PiG2BMkK3s4  
6. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ATqV_I8DCh0  
 
 
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER – III 
Computer  Organization  and Architecture  (PCC)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML132  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week (L:  T: P:  J) 3:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course Learning Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Explain  the basic organization of a computer system and the concept of programs as sequences of 
machine instructions.  
 Describe arithmetic and logical operations with integer operands.  
 Describe memory hierarchy and the hardware requirements for cache memory.  
 Demonstrate different ways of communicating with I/O devices and standard I/O interfaces.  
 Illustrate organization of a simple processor, pipelined processor and other computing systems  
Pre-Requisites:  
 Computer Basics  
 Digital Logic  
 Mathematics  
 Assembly Language  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module  1 : CENTRAL  PROCESSING  UNIT  
Basic  Structure  of Computers:  
Basic  Operational  Concepts,  Bus Structures,  Performance  – Processor  
Clock,  Basic  Performance  Equation , Clock  Rate, Instruction Set: CISC and 
RISC, Performance  Measurement . 
Machine  Instructions  and Programs:  
Memory Location and  Addresses, Instructions and Instruction Sequencing,  
Addressing  Modes . 
Self study :  Memory Operations   
 
 
 
8  
 
 
 
   (CO1)  
   Apply  
Module  2 : COMPUTER  ARITHMETIC  
Numbers, Arithmetic Operations and Characters, Addition and Subtraction  
of Signed Numbers, Multiplication of Positive Numbers, Signed Operand  
Multiplication,  Fast Multiplication,  Integer Division . 
Self Study: Design of Fast Adders  8 (CO2)  
Apply  
Module  3 : MEMORY  ORGANIZATION  
Basic Concepts, Semiconductor RAM Memories: Internal organization of  
memory chips, static memories, Asynchronous and synchronous DRAMs,  
Cache  Memories – Mapping  Functions.  
Self Study: Virtual memories  8 (CO3)  
Apply  
Module  4 : INPUT - OUTPUT  ORGANIZATION  
Accessing  I/O Devices,  Interrupts  – Interrupt  Hardware,  Direct  
Memory  Access,  Buses,  Interface  Circuits  
Self Study:  Exploring Hardware and Software Interrupts  8 (CO4 ) 
Apply  
Module  5 : BASIC  PROCESSING  UNIT  
Basic  Processing  Unit:  Some  Fundamental  Concepts,  Execution  of a 
Complete  Instruction,  Multiple  Bus Organization, Hard -wired Control  
Pipelining:  
Basic  concepts  of pipelining , parallel processing  
Self Study: Microprogrammed control  8 (CO5 ) 
Apply  
 
Course  outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Identify the basic organization of a computer system  and the  concept  of programs  as sequences  of 
machine instructions . (Apply ) 
2. Solve the various arithmetic operation  in computer hardware (Apply)  
 Identify the  memory  hierarchy  and the hardware requirements for cache memory . (Apply) 
 Identify different  ways  of communicating  with I/O devices and  standard I/O  interfaces. (Apply) 
5. Estimate  the processor  time and CPU usage.  (Apply)  
6. Design and analyze Memory devices (Analyze - for Assignment)  
Reference  Books:  
1. Carl Hamacher,  ZvonkoVranesic,  SafwatZaky,  Computer  Organization,  6th Edition,  
Tata McGraw Hill, 2012.  
2. William  Stallings:  Computer  Organization  & Architecture,  11th Edition,  Pearson, 2022.  
3. M. Morris Mano, “Computer system Architecture”, 3rd Edition, Prentice -Hall Publishers,  
2017.  
 
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – III 
 Artificial  Intelligence  (PCI)  
Credit:  4 
Course  Code  24AML133  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:2:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Become familiar with basic principles of AI toward problem solving, inference, perception, 
knowledge representation, and learning.  
 Investigate applications of AI techniques in intelligent agents, expert systems, artificial neural 
networks,  and other machine learning models.  
 Learn the methods of solving problems using Artificial Intelligence.  
 Learn the knowledge representation techniques, reasoning techniques and planning   
Prerequisites:  
  Problem solving skill and Python programming language  
 Number of 
Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  
Introduction to AI:  history, Intelligent systems, foundation and sub-area of AI, 
applications .  
Problem solving:  Production System, water jug problem, Missionaries and 
Cannibals Problem, 8 -Puzzle problem, State space search, Control Strategies , 
Characteristics of Problem.  
 
Practical:  
1. Write a Program to Implement Tic -Tac-Toe game using Python.  
2. Write a Program to Implement Water Jug using Python.  
Self-study:  current trend and development of AI , Implementation of 
Missionaries and Cannibals Problem.  6+4 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Problem solving  
Uninformed Search Strategies:  Breadth -First search, Uniform - Cost Search, 
Depth -first search, Depth -limited search, Iterative deepening depth -first search, 
Bidirectional search, comparing uninformed search strategies.  
Informed (Heuristic) Search strategies:  Best-first search, A* algorithm, AO* 
algorithm  
Constraint Satisfaction Problems: Crypt -arithmetic problem  
 
Practical:  
1. Implement AO* Search algorithm.  6+4 (CO2)  
Apply  
2. Write a Program to Implement Breadth First Search using Python.  
Self-study: Hill climbing algorithm, Memory bounded  RBFS algorithm and 
SMA* algorithm  
Module -3: Game Playing  
Adversarial Search:  Nim Game problem, minimax procedure, alpha -beta 
pruning.  
Advanced problem -solving  paradigm:  Planning: types of planning system, 
block world problem, logic -based  planning, Linear planning using a goal stack, 
Sussman  anomaly problem in goal stack . 
Practical:  
1. Write a program to implement the Minimax  Algorithm.  
2. Write a Program to Implement Tower of Hanoi  
Self-study: Means End Analysis  6+4 (CO3 ) 
Apply  
Module -4 Logical Reasoning  
Logical reasoning:  propositional calculus, propositional logic, Natural 
Deduction system, Axiomatic system, Semantic Tableau system in 
propositional logic, resolution refutation in propositional logic, predicate logic, 
forward and backward chaining.  
Practical:  
1. Implementation of problem -solving  strategies: either using Forward 
Chaining or Backward Chaining.  
2. Write predicates to convert centigrade temperatures to Fahrenheit and 
check if the temperature  is below freezing.  
Self-study: Logic programming  (LISP) , Horn Clause  6+4 (CO4 ) 
Apply  
Module -5: Knowledge Representation & Expert Systems  
Knowledge Representation:  Approaches  to knowledge representation, 
knowledge representation using semantic network, extended semantic network , 
Knowledge representation using Frames.  
Expert Systems: Architecture of expert systems, Roles of Expert systems,  
Typical expert systems - MYCIN.   
Application of AI: AI in Healthcare, AI  in Finance  
Practical:  
1. Implement MYCIN expert system  
Self-study: DART, X CON, Edge AI and Distributed AI  6+4 (CO5 ) 
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be  able to  
1. Understand the concepts of AI, characteristics of problems,  and apply various techniques for problem 
solving.  
2. Apply appropriate search techniques to solve AI problems.  
3. Appl y algorithms that can learn to play games and make decisions   
4. Develop knowledge base sentences using propositional logic and first order logic for logical 
reasoning.  
5. Apply AI techniques for knowledge representation and implement various expert systems  on real 
world problems . 
Reference Books:  
1. Saroj Kaushik, Artificial Intelligence, 2nd edition, Cengage learning  India , 2023 
2. Staurt  Russel, Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson Education, 4th  Edition, 
2022. 
3. Elaine Rich, Kevin Knight, Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill , 4th Revised edition  
 
Online Resources:  
1. https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/edge -
ai#:~:text=Decreased%20bandwidth,simultaneous%20data%20transmission%20and%20reception.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – III 
Data Structures & Applications  (PCI)  
Credit:  4 
Course  Code  24AML134  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/ Week (L: T : P: J) 3:0:2:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to:  
 Develop the skills needed to efficiently manage and manipulate these data structures in 
various applications.  
 Distinguish the conceptual and applicative differences in binary trees, binary search trees for 
effective data retrieval and manipulation.  
 Apply heap trees, hash tables, and AVL trees to manage data efficiently.  
 Apply graph theory concepts an d algorithms to effectively solve graphical problems.  
Prerequisite:   C Concepts and Programming  
 Number 
of 
Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module 1: Stacks and Queues  
Concept Learning: Introduction to struct ure and unions, Data Structures: 
Classification (Primitive & Non -primitive), Operations, Pattern Matching 
Algorithms (Brute force, KMP) . 
Stacks: Definition, Operations, Implementation using arrays, Applications 
of Stacks – Infix to Postfix Conversion and Postfix Expression Evaluation.  
Queues: Definition , Operations, Implementation, Applications, Circular 
Queue (Message queue using Circular queue), Doubly Ended Queue, 
Priority Queue.  
Practical:   
1. Design, develop and Implement a Program in C for converting an 
Infix Expression to Postfix Expression. Program should support  
both parenthesized and free parenthesized expressions with the 
operators: +, -, *, /, % (Remainder), ^ (Power) and alpha numeric 
operands.  
2. Design, Develop and Implement a Program in C to Evaluation of 
Suffix expression with single digit operands and operators: +, -, *, /, 
%, ^ using Stack.  
3. Design, Develop and Implement a menu driven Program in C for the 
following operations on Circular QUEUE of Characters (Array 6+4 CO1  
Apply  
Implementation of Queue with maximum size MAX)  
 Insert an Element on to Circular QUEUE  
 Delete an Element from Circular QUEUE  
 Demonstrate Overflow and Underflow situations on Circular 
QUEUE  
 Display the status of Circular Q UEUE  
Support the program with appropriate functions for each of the above 
operations.  
Self-Study : Pattern Matching Algorithm:  Rabin -Karp, and Boyer -Moore  
Module  2: Linked  List 
Linked Lists: Definition, Create, Insert, Delete, Update, Traverse, and 
Position -based Operations, Concatenate, Merge, and Reverse Lists, Doubly 
Linked List Implementation and Operations, Circular Linked List 
Implementation and Operations, Applications of Lists (Polynomial 
addition). Implementation of stacks and queues using Linked List  
Practical:   
1. Design, Develop and Implement a menu driven Program in C for the 
following operations on Singly Linked List (SLL) of Student Data 
with the fields: USN, Name, Branch, Sem, PhNo.  
 Create a SLL of N Students Data by using f ront insertion.  
 Display the status of SLL and count the number of nodes in it  
 Perform Insertion / Deletion at End of SLL  
 Perform Insertion / Deletion at Front of SLL  
2. Design, Develop and Implement a menu driven Program in C for the 
following operations on D oubly Linked List (DLL) . 
 Create a DLL of N Data by using end insertion.  
 Display the status of DLL and count the number of nodes in it  
 Perform Insertion and Deletion at End of DLL  
 Perform Insertion and Deletion at Front of DLL  
Self-Study : Josephus Problem using Circular Linked List  6+4  
 
 
 
 
 
CO2  
Apply  
Module  3: Trees  
Concept Learning: Trees: General Tree Representation, Traversals, 
Applications.  
Binary Trees: Definition, Properties, Traversals, Applications.  
Binary Search Tree: Definition, Implementation, Search, Insert, Delete 
operations. Building and Evaluating Binary Expression Tree.  
Practical:  
1. Write a C program to find maximum depth or height  of a complete  
binary tree.  
2. Write a C program to print all the path from root to l eaf path for 
given binary tree.  
3. Write a C program to insert a new node as a left child in a threaded 
binary tree.  
4. Design, Develop and Implement a menu driven Program in C for 
the following operations on Binary Search Tree (BST) of Integ ers. 6+4 CO3  
Apply  
 Create a BST of N Integers: 6, 9, 5, 2, 8, 15, 24, 14, 7, 8, 5, 2  
 Traverse the BST in Inorder , Preorder and Post Order  
 Search the BST for a given element (KEY) and report the 
appropriate message  
Self-study : Minimax Trees (Game Trees)  
Module 4: Advanced Trees & Hashing  
Concept Learning: Heap Tree: Definition, Implementation, Insert, Delete, 
Peek operations. Hashing: Hash Table, Hash Functions, Collision Handling 
by Open Addressing, Chaining , AVL tree.  
Practical:  
1. Write a C program to construct MAX -Heap.  
2. Write a C program to implement hashing technique and collision 
resolution technique.  
Self-study : Red-Black Trees: Concept and Properties  6+4 (CO4)  
Apply  
Module  5: Graphs  
Concept Learning: Graphs: Disjoint sets, Representation of Graphs - 
Adjacency/ Cost Matrix, Adjacency Lists, and Traversal of Graphs (BFS 
and DFS)  
Practical:   
1. Design, Develop and Implement a Program in C for the following 
operations on Graph(G) of Cities , create  a Graph of N cities using 
adjacency Matrix  and p rint all the nodes reachable from a given 
starting node in a digraph using DFS/BFS . 
2. Write a C Program to detect Cycle in a Directed Graph  
3. Write a C Program to find if there is a path between two vertices in 
a directed graph . 
Self-study : Hamiltonian Path  6+4 (CO5)  
Apply  
Course outcomes:  
The students will be  able to  
1. Apply and implement fundamental data structures like stacks, queues, and pattern 
matching algorithms.    
2. Apply and manipulate various types of linked lists, in cluding  practical applications such as 
polynomial addition.  
3. Demonstrate the ability to use tree structures for different traversal methods and 
implement binary search trees for data retrieval and manipulation.  
4. Apply heap trees, hash tables, and AVL trees for effi cient data management.  
5. Apply graph theory concepts and algorithms to solve graphical problems effectively.  
Reference Books:  
1. Data Structures Using C, Reema Thareja, Third Edition, 2023, Oxford Higher Education, 
ISBN -10: 978 -93-5497 -717-7 
2. “Data Structures and Program Design in C”, Robert Kruse, C L Tondo, Bruce Leung and 
Shashi Mogalla, PHI, 2nd Edition, 2015.  
3. Y. Langasm, M. J. Augenstein, A. M. Tenenbaum (2001) Data Structures Using C and C++, 
Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, India.  
4. T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leis erson and R. L. Rivest (1990) Introduction to Algorithms, Third 
Edition, MIT Press, MA.  
5. Fundamentals of Data Structures in C -- by Horowitz, Sahni and Anderson -Freed (Silicon 
Press 2007).  
6. Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Mark Allen Weiss, 4th  Revised edition; 
2013, Addison -Wesley, ISBN -13: 978 -8131714744 . 
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – III 
 MICROCONTROLLER AND EMBEDDED SYSTEMS  (PCI)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML135  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 1:2:2:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Illustrate the logic design concepts and combinational logic circuits  
 Provide the student with the basic understanding of microcontroller and embedded systems design.  
 Learn the addressing modes, instructions, and assembler directives and develop the ALP to solve 
problems.  
 Develop embedded C programs for microcontrollers and run on the simulator, target board and various 
interfaced hardware devices.  
 Integrate Hardware and Software to Implement the required embedded smart systems  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 
Logic Design & Applications:  Review of Basic Logic gates . 
Combinational Logic Circuits: Sum-of-Products Methods, Karnaugh Map 
simplifications, Don’t – care Conditions, Product -of-Sums Simplifications, 
Simplification by Quine -McClusky Method, Map Entered Variable Method.  6 Apply  
(CO1)  
Laboratory Component : Realize the following digital circuits using Digital 
Trainer kit.  
1. Realization of Boolean expression:  
             
2. Realize Half Adder, Full Adder , Half Subtractor and Full Subtractor using 
Logic Gates . 
3. Realize Binary to Gray  & Gray to Binary Code Converter s using Logic 
Gates  4 Apply  
(CO1, 
CO2)  
Module -2 
ARM -32 bit Microcontroller:  
Thumb -2 technology and applications of  ARM, Architecture of ARM Cortex M3, 
Various Units in the architecture, debugging  support, General Purpo se Registers, 
Special Registers, exceptions, interrupts, stack operation, reset sequence.  6  
Apply  
(CO2)  
 
Laboratory Component : 
Conduct the following experiments on an ARM CORTEX M3 evaluation board 
to learn ALP and using evaluation version of Embedded 'C' & Keil uVision -4 
tool/compiler.  
1. Write a program to multiply two 16 bit binary numbers.  
2. Write a program to find the sum of first 10 integer numbers.  4 Apply  
(CO2)  
 

3. Write a program to find factorial of a number.  
4. Write a program to add an array of 16 bit numbers and store the 32 bit result 
in memory loca tion. 
Module -3 
ARM Cortex M3 Instruction Sets and Programming:  
Assembly basics, In struction list and description , Special instructions, Useful 
instructions,  Assembly and C language Programming    
6 Understand  
(CO3)  
Laboratory Component : 
Conduct the following experiments on an ARM CORTEX M3 evaluation board 
to learn ALP and using evaluation version of Embedded 'C' & Keil uVision -4 
tool/compiler.  
1. Write a program to find the square of a number (1 to 10) using look -up table.  
2. Write a program to find the largest/smallest number in an array of 32 
numbers.  
3. Write a program to arrange a series of 32 -bit numbers in 
ascending/descending order.  
4. Write a program to count the number of ones and zeros in two consecutive 
memory locations.  4 Apply  
(CO3, 
CO4)  
Module -4 
Embedded System Components:  
Embedded Vs General computing system, History of embedded systems, 
Classification of Embedded systems, Major applications areas of embedded 
systems, purpose of embedded systems Core of an Embedded System, Memory, 
Sensors, Actuators, LED, 7 segment LED disp lay, stepper motor, Keyboard, 
Communication Interfaces (12C, SPI, IrDA, Bluetooth, Wi -Fi, Zigbee only) . 6 Apply  
(CO4)  
 
Laboratory Component : 
Conduct the following experiments on an ARM CORTEX M3 evaluation board 
to learn ALP and using evaluation version of Embedded 'C' & Keil uVision -4 
tool/compiler.  
1. Display “Hello World” message using Internal UART.  
2. Interface and Control the speed of a DC Motor.  
3. Interface a Stepper motor and rotate it in clockwise and anti -clockwise 
direction.  
4. Display the Hex digits 0 t o F on a 7 -segment LED interface, with an 
appropriate delay in between.  4 Apply  
(CO4)  
 
Module -5 
Introduction to Raspberry Pi : 
Different Models of Raspberry Pi, Peripherals of Raspberry Pi. Applications of 
Raspberry Pi , The Voltage hazard Information , General information on other pins 
and their functionality . 6 Apply  
(CO5)  
Laboratory Component : 
Conduct the following experiments by writing program using Raspberry Pi  
board.  
1. The LED Interfacing ,  
2. The First Button Interface with Raspberry Pi ,  
3. UART example.  4 Apply  
(CO5)  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be able to  
 Apply Karnaugh Map, Quine -McClusky Method  and Map Entered Variable Method  to simplify 
digital circuits.  (Apply)  
 Describe the architectural features and instructions of 32 -bit microcontroller ARM CortexM3.  
(Understand)  
 Apply the knowledge gained for Programming ARM Cortex M3 for different applications.  (Apply)  
 Understand the basic hardware components and their selection method based on the characteristics 
and attributes of an em bedded system.  (Understand)  
 Interact with Arduino using Arduino sketch to program the devices.  (Apply)  
Reference Books:  
1. M. Morris Mano, Digital Design, 4th Edition, Pearson Prentice Hall 2008  
2. Joseph Yiu, ''The Definitive Guide to the ARM Cortex -M3", 211d Edition, Newnes, (Elsevier), 2010.  
3. Shibu K V, "Introduction to Embedded Systems", Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, 2nd 
Edition.  
4. Exploring Arduino: Tools and Techniques for Engineering, Wizardry 1st Edition WILEY, ISBN -10: 
1118549368, ISBN -13: 97 8-1118549360.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – III 
Object  Oriented  Programming  Using  JAVA         (PBL) 
Credit:  2 
Course  Code  24AML136  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/ Week ( L:T: P:  J) 0:0:2:2  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  30 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students to  
 Understand  and apply  the basic concepts  of object -oriented  programming.  
 Implement  java programs  for establish  interfaces  and to develop  reusable  software  
components.  
 Build  software  development skills  using  java programming  for real-world  applications.  
Pre-requisite:  
Basic Programming Concepts: Data Types, Variables, Control Flow, Functions/Methods.  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Task  1 
An Overview  of Java,  Data  Types,  Variables,  and Arrays,  Operators,  
Control  Statements,  Classes  and Methods  
1. Write  a JAVA  program  to display  message  “Welcome  to BNMIT”  and 
“I am first batch  of Autonomous”  in two different  lines.  
2. Write  a JAVA  program  to display  at-least five student  information  by 
considering  student USN, name, branch and semester.  
3. Write  a java program  that prints  all real solutions  to the quadratic  
equation  ax2 +bx+c=0.  Read in  a, b, c and  use the quadratic  formula.  
4. Write  a java program  to create  objects  of class  Students  with student  
USN, name,  branch and semester and display  information.  
Self study: Write a JAVA program to display at -least five student information 
by considering student USN, name, branch and semester.  2 (CO1)  
Apply  
Task  2 
Method  overloading,  Inheritance,  polymorphism,  encapsulation  
1. Calculate area of Rectangle, Triangle and Circle by using method  
overloading  
2. Write  a java program  to create  a class  Car that inherits  from  base 
class  Vehicle  using  private  strings  and getter/setter  methods  to 
achieve  encapsulation.  
3. Write a java program to develop a suitable hierarchy, classes for  Point, 
Shape, Rectangle, Square, Circle, Ellipse, Triangle, Polygon,  etc. Design  
a simple  test application  to demonstrate  dynamic  polymorphism.  
4. Write a java program to create a class named Employee. Extend  Faculty  
class  from  Employee  class.  Extend  Professor  Class  from  Faculty class. 2 (CO1)  
Apply  
Access members of super class using super keyword.  Create an instance 
to sub class called Professor and access members  of both Faculty  and 
Professor using  instance.  
5. Write  a java program  to create  an abstract  class  named  Shape  that 
contains  two integers and  an empty  method  named  print Area().  
Self study: Write a java program to develop a suitable hierarchy, classes for 
Point, Shape, Rectangle, Square, Circle, Ellipse, Triangle, Polygon, etc. Design a 
simple test application to demonstrate dynamic polymorphism.  
Task  3 
Enumerations,  Strings  
1. Write a java program to create an enum of restaurants that can be  used 
to pick user choice  restaurant.  
2. Given an input string, you are expected to extract either all vowels,  or 
all non-vowels  from  the string  and return  the result  as all lowercase  or 
uppercase,  based on  the options specified.  
 input1  represents  the input  string.  
 input2 represents the extraction option. 0 for extraction of all  non-
vowels.  1 for  extraction of  all vowels.  
 input3 represents the output c ase option. 0 for all lowercase  letters.  
1 for  all UPPERCASE letters.  
3. Write a java program to find the duplicate words and their number of  
occurrences  in a string.  
4. Write a Java program to replace each substring of a given string that  
matches  the given  regular  expression  with the given  replacement.  
Self-study : Write a Java program to replace each substring of a given string that 
matches the given regular expression with the given replacement.  2 (CO1) 
Apply  
Task 4 
Exception Handling  
1. Write a program in java if number is less than 10 and greater than 50 it 
generates the exception out of range. Else it displays the square of 
number.  
2. Write a program in java to enter the number through command line 
argument. If first and second number is not entered then it will generate 
the exception. Also divide the first number with second number and 
generate the arithmetic exception.  
Self Study: Write a program in java to enter the number through command line 
argument. If first and second number is not entered then it wil l generate the 
exception. Also divide the first number with second number and generate the 
arithmetic exception.  2 (CO2) 
Apply  
Task  5 
Multithreaded  Programming  
1. Write a java program for multithread in which user thread and thread  
started from main method invoked at a time each thread sleep for 1  sec. 
2. Write a java program that implements a multi -thread application that  has 
three  threads.  First thread  generates  random  integer  every  1 second and  
if the value is even, second thread  computes the square  of the n umber 
and prints. If the value is odd, the third thread will  print  the value of  
cube  of the number.  
3. Write an application that executes two threads. One thread displays  “An” 
every 1000 milliseconds and other displays “B” every 3000  milliseconds.  
Create the  threads  by extending  the Thread  class.  
Self Study: Write a java program that implements a multi -thread application that 
has three threads. First thread generates random integer every 1 second and if the 
value is even, second thread computes the square of t he number and prints. If the 
value is odd, the third thread will print the value of cube of the number.  2 (CO2)  
Apply  
Task  6 
Collections  
1. Write  a Java program  to create  a new array  list, add some  colors  
(string) and print out the  collection.  
2. Write  a Java program  to iterate  through  all elements  in a linked  list 
starting  at the  specified position.  
3. Write  a Java program  to append  the specified  element  to the end of   a 
hash set.  
4. Write  a Java program  to create  a new tree set, add some  colors  
(string) and print out the  tree set. 
5. Write  a Java program  to create  a new priority  queue,  add some  
colors  (string) and print out  the elements of the priority  queue.  
Self Study: Write  a Java program to iterate through all elements in a linked list 
starting at the specified position.  2 (CO1)  
Apply  
Task  7 
Collections  
1. Write a Java program to associate the specified value with the  
specified  key in a Tree Map.  
2. Write a Java program for the  following: i) Create a doubly linked  list 
of elements. ii) Delete a given element from the above list. iii)  Display  
the contents of  the list after  deletion.  
3. Write  a Java program  to store  content  in Hash  table  and use 
enumeration  to display  contents of Hash Table.  
4. Write a Java program to create a vector of n elements and perform  the 
following  operations:  Adding  elements,  Removing  elements  and 
Display  elements.  
5. Write a program to add elements to the HashMap given the key and  
value  data type is string,  get size of HashMap,  and check  if HashMap  
is empty.  2 (CO1)  
Apply  
Self Study: Write a Java program to store content in Hash table and use 
enumeration to display contents of Hash Table.  
Task 8  
Event Handling  
1. Write a Java program that creates a user interface  to perform 
integer divisions. The user enters two numbers in the text fields, 
Num1 and Num2. The division of Num1 and Num 2 is displayed in 
the Result field when the Divide button is clicked. If Num1 or Num2 
were not an integer, the program would throw a Number Format 
Exception. If Num2 were Zero, the program would throw an 
Arithmetic Exception. Display the exception in a message dialog 
box. 
Self Study: Write a Java program that  2 (CO3) 
Apply  
Task 9  
1. Event Handling  
2. Write a Java program that handles all mouse events and shows the 
event name at the center of the window when a mouse event is fired.  
Self Study: Write a Java program that handle keyboard events in Java  
 2 (CO3) 
Apply  
Task  10 
Event  Handling  
1. Write a java program that simulates a traffic light.  The program lets  the 
user select one of three lights: Red, Yellow or Green with radio  buttons. 
On selecting a button an appropriate message with “STOP”  or 
“READY” or” GO” should appear above the buttons in selected  color. 
Initially, there  is no message  shown.  
Self Study:Write a java program that works as a simple calculator. Use a grid  
layout  to arrange  buttons  for the digits  and for the +,-,*, % operations.  Add a 
text field to display  the result.  Handle  any possible  exception like  divided by  
zero.  2 (CO3) 
Apply  
Task  11 
Event  Handling   
1. Write  a java program  to create  a frame  that contains  two buttons     
and one text field.  
2. Write  a java program  to handle  the button  click  events  by 
implementing  ActionListener  Interface.  
3. Write  a java program  to create  two textfields  to display  single  line 
text string and one TextArea that is used to display multiple -line text 
string. Both should be editable  in nature.  2 (CO3) 
Apply  
Self Study: Write a java program to create a drop -down menu of choices. When    
a user selects a particular item from the drop -down then it is shown  on the top 
of the menu.  
Task  12 
Java  Script  
1. Write  a program  to Swap  Two Variables.  
2. Write  a program  to Generate a  Random Number.  
3. Write  a program  to Check  the Number  of Occurrences  of a Character  
in the String.  
4. Write  a program  to Count  the Number  of Vowels  in a String.  
5. Write  a java script  program  to pass a 'javascript  function'  as 
parameter.  
Self Study: Write a program to Count the Number of Vowels in a String.  2 (CO1) 
Apply  
Task  13 
File handling  
1. Write a java program that reads a file name from the user, and then  
displays  information  about  whether  the file exists,  whether  the file is 
readable, whether the file is writable, the type of file and the  length  of 
the file in bytes.  
Self Study : Write a java program that displays the number of characters, lines  
and words in a  text file.  2 (CO2)  
Apply  
Task 14  
File handling  
1. Write a java program that reads a file and displays the file on the  screen  
with line number  before each line.  
2. Write a java program in which data is read from one file and should  be 
written  in another  file. Name  of both file is given  through  command  line 
arguments.  
Self Study:Write a java program in which data is read from one file and should  
be written in another  file line by line. 2 (CO2)  
Apply  
Task 15  
Mini -Project  
 Develop  real world  application  using  graphical  user interface  and object -orient  
concept  for selected problem statement.  
 The problem  statement  can be selected  from  the following  title but not limited      to 
the same.  
1. Electricity  bill generation  
2. Currency  converter  / Distance converter  / Time converter     
3. Pay slip generation  
4. Online  book store  
5. Airline reservation system   
6. Designing  of simple  calculator   
(CO4)  
Create  
Course  Outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Develop Java application programs to implement basic Object Oriented concepts. (Apply)  
2. Apply the concepts of Multithreading, Exception handling, event and file handling to develop efficient 
and error free codes. (Apply)  
3. Design event driven GUI and web related applications which mimic the real word scenarios. 
(Apply)  
4. Design, implement, test, and debug graphical user interfaces to solve real time applications.  (Create -
for Mini project) . 
Reference  Books:  
1. Herbert  Schildt,  “Java , The complete  Reference”,  Tata McGraw -Hill, 12th Edition,2022.  
2. P. J. Deitel,  H. M. Deitel,  “Java  for Programmers: with Generative AI”, Pearson  Education,  PHI, 
5th Edition,  2025.  
3. P. Radha  Krishna,  “Object  Oriented  Programming  through  Java”,  Universities  Press,  2nd Edition, 
2007  
4. Bruce  Eckel,  “Thinking  in Java”, Pearson  Education,  4th Edition,  2006.  
5. Sachin  Malhotra,  Saurabh  Chaudhary,  “Programming  in Java”,  Oxford  University  Press,  5th Edition, 
2010.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU , Approved by AICTE  
 
Department of Mathematics  
 
Syllabus  
Semester:  IV 
Course : Statistics, Probability  and Graph theory  
Course Code: 2 4MAC141 (Common to CSE, ISE, AIML)  
L:T:P:J  2:2:0:0 CIA: 50 
Credits:  03 SEA: 50 
Hours:  40 SEA Duration: 0 3 Hours  
 
Course Learning Objectives: The students will be able to  
1 Provide  an insight  into applications  of Graph Theory , Curve fitting & Statistical methods . 
2 Develop  the knowledge of  probability,  joint probability  distribution and Queuing theory  occurring  in digital 
signal  processing,  design  engineering  and micro  wave  engineering.  
Module -1: Curve fitting & Statistical methods  No. of 
hours  Blooms 
cognitive 
Levels  
Examples from Engineering that require curve fitting  and statistical methods . 
Curve  Fitting: Curve  fitting  by the method  of least squares -fitting  the curves  of the  form :  
𝑦 = 𝑎𝑥+𝑏,  y = 𝑎𝑥𝑏 𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝑦 = 𝑎𝑥2 + 𝑏𝑥 + 𝑐. 
Statistical methods : Introduction to Moments, Skewness,  Kurtosis and problems.  Karl 
Pearson’s  coefficient of correlation and lines of regression . 
Experiential Learning component:   Problems on c urve fitting and statistical methods  L: 04 
T: 04 Apply  
Module -2: Probability distributions & Joint  probability  distributions    
Examples from Engineering  that require Probability  and Joint probability distribution  
Probability distributions:  Review of basic probability theory. Discrete and continuous 
Random variables, probability mass/density functions  (definitions only) . Binomial, Poisson, 
exponential and normal distributions  (without proof) .   
Joint probability distribution:  Joint Probabili ty distribution for two discrete random variables, 
expectation , covariance and correlation.  
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on Binomial, Poisson, Exponential and Normal 
distributions   
L: 04  
T: 04  
 
 
Apply  
Module -3: Markov chain & Sampling theory    
Examples from Engineering  that require Markov Chain and Sampling Theory  
Markov chain : Introduction to Stochastic process, Probability vectors, Stochastic matrices, 
Regular stochastic matrices, Markov Chains, Higher transition probabilities, Stationary 
distribution of Regular Markov chains and absorbing states, Markovian processes . 
Samplin g theory : Introduction to sampling theory, testing  of hypothesis, level of significance,  
confidence limits, test of significance of mean and difference of means for large samples -z-test, 
test of significance of small Samples -Student’s t - distribution, Good ness of fit -Chi-Square test.   
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on Markovian processes  and, Sampling Theory  L: 04 
T: 04  
Apply  
Module -4: Queuing theory    
Examples from Engineering  that require  queueing theory  
Introduction , birth and death process , Kendall's Notation , Symbolic representation of a queuing 
model, single server Poisson  queuing model with infinite capacity (M/M/1: ∞/FCFS), when 
𝜆𝑛=𝜆 and 𝜇𝑛=𝜇(𝜆<𝜇), Multiple se rver Poisson queuing model with infinite capacity  
(M/M/S: ∞/ FCFS), when  𝜆𝑛=𝜆 for all  𝑛,(𝜆>𝑆𝜇),   
Experiential Learning component:  Problems on (M/M/1: ∞/FCFS)  and (M/M/S: ∞/ FCFS ) 
queuing model s L: 04 
T: 04 Apply  
Module -5: Graph theory    
Examples from Engineering  that require  graph theory  
Basic concepts, types of graphs, order and size of a graph, in -degree and out -degree, bipartite -
graphs, connected and disconnected graphs, Eulerian graph, Hamiltonian graphs, sub -graphs, 
isomorphic graphs.  Matrix representation of graphs, adjacency matrix, incidence matrix.  
Planar graphs: definition, characterization of planar graphs, Kuratowski’s theorem, Euler’s 
formula and consequences.  L: 04  
T: 04 Apply  
Experiential Learning component:   Problems on detection of planar and non -planar graphs  
Course Outcomes: After completing the course, the students will be able to  
CO 1:  Make use of correlation and regression analysis to fit a suitable mathematical model for the statistical data.  
CO 2:  Apply discrete and continuous probability and joint probability distributions in analyzing the probability 
models arising in the engineering  field.  
CO 3:  Use Markov chain in prediction of future events and demonstrate the validity of testing the hypothesis.  
CO 4:  Acquire skills in analyzing queuing models.  
CO 5:  Apply the knowledge of Graph  Theory in  Network modeling, electrical  netwo rk and computational 
algorithms.  
 
 
 
 
Reference Books:  
1. E. Kreyszig: “Advanced Engineering Mathematics ”, John Wiley & Sons, 10th Edition(Reprint), 
2016.  
2. B. S. Grewal: “Higher Engineering Mathematics ”, Khanna Publishers, 44th Edition,  2017.  
3. S. D. Sharma : “Operation s Research", Kedar  Nath Ram Nath  & Co. Meerut, 2014.  
4. T. Veerarajan :  Probability, Statistics and Random processes, McGraw Hill Education(India) 
Private Limited, Third edition, Nineteenth reprint 2017.  
5. C. Ray Wylie, Louis C. Barrett : “Advanced Engineering Mathematics", 6th  Edition,  McGraw -
Hill Book Co., New York, 1995.  
6. B. V. Ramana: "Higher Engineering Mathematics" 11th Edition, Tata McGraw -Hill, 2010.  
7. Srimanta Pal &  Subo dh C. Bhunia: “Engineering Mathematics”, Oxford University Press, 3rd 
Reprint, 2016.  
8. Narsingh Deo, “ Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and Computer Science ”, Prentice 
Hall of India, 2000.   
Web links and Video Lectures:  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104098  
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1YkfeR05YXY  
3. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/111/104/111104079/  
4. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGkpXk -AnWU  
5. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/106/104/106104170/   
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Operating  Systems  (PCC ) 
SEMESTER –IV 
Subject Code: 24AML142  L:T:P:J:  3:0:0:0 CIA Marks:  50 
Credits:  3 SEA  Marks:  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  
Hours  40 SEA  Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Objectives:  
 Introduce basic conc epts of OS, Process management and CPU scheduling to improve CPU utilization  
 Illustrate process synchronization and Deadlocks in managing concurrent processes.  
 Illustrate the concepts of main memory, virtual memory and secondary memory such as SSD for effective 
memory management.  
 Introduction to Unix File System and file related commands  
 Illustrate file attributes and shell programming to write simple shell scripts  
 Prerequisites: Basic theoretical concepts of C programming  
Module  1: Introduction  to Operating  System  & 
Process  Management  Teaching  
Hours  Blooms  
cognitive  
Levels  
Fundamental Concepts of Operating System: Introduction to Operating Systems , 
Operating system functions and services, historical evolution of operating systems,  
System  boot.  
Process  Management:  Process  abstraction,  process  address  space,  process  
management,  system calls, threads.   
CPU  Scheduling:  Levels  of scheduling,  comparative  study  of scheduling  
algorithms.  Multilevel Queue Scheduling, Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduling  
Practical:  Usage of system calls using C (fork, vfork, exec,  read, write, seek, etc)  
Self-Study Component: Multi -processor scheduling.   
 
 
8  
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Module  2: Process  Synchronization and  Deadlocks   
Concurrent Processes: Critical section problem, semaphores, Classical problems of  
synchronization,  monitors,  inter-process  communication,   
Deadlocks:  Characterization,  prevention  and avoidance,  deadlock  detection  
and recovery.  
Practical: IPC using pipes, fifo, shared memory  
Self-Study Component: M essage passing mechanisms. Applications of deadlocks   
 
8  
(CO2)  
Apply  
Module  3: Memory  Management   
Memory  Management:  Background;  Swapping;  Contiguous  memory allocation;  
Paging; Structure of page table; Segmentation, virtual memory concept.  
Solid  State  Drives -SSD Architecture,  Flash  Controller,  Garbage  Collection,  Bad 
Block  Management.  
Demand paging, page replacement algorithms, Disk Scheduling.  
Practical: Implementation of page replacement algorithms , disk scheduling 
algorithms  
Self-Study Component:  Thrashing   
 
8  
(CO3)  
Apply  
Module  4: UNIX file  system   
Unix  files:  UNIX  Architecture,  Naming  files.  Basic  file types/categories.  
Organization of files. Hidden files. Standard directories. Parent child relationship.  
The home directory and the HOME variable. Reaching required files - the PATH  
variable,  manipulating  the PATH,  Relative  and absolute  pathnames.  Directory  
commands – pwd, cd, mkdir, rmdir  commands. The dot (.) and double dots (..)  
notations to represent present and parent directories and their usage in relative path  
names.  File related  commands  – cat, mv, rm,  cp, wc and od commands.  
Practical:  Shell commands  
Self-Study Component:  Execution  of UNIX  Shell  Commands   
 
 
 
8  
 
 
(CO4)  
Apply  
Module5:  File attributes  and Shell  programming   
File attributes  and permissions:  The ls command  with options.  Changing  file 
permissions: the relative and absolute permissions changing methods. Recursively  
changing  file permissions. Directory  permissions.  
The shells interpretive cycle: Wild cards. Removing the special meanings of wild  
cards.  Three  standard  files and redirection . Connecting  commands : Pipe, Basic and 
extended regular expressions, grep,  egrep.  
Shell  programming : Ordinary  and environment  variables.  Read  and read-only 
commands. Command line arguments. exit and exit status of a command. Logical  
operators for conditional execution. The test command and its shortcut. The if, 
while,  for and case control statements. The set and shift commands and handling 
positional  parameters.  The here (  << ) document. Simple  shell program examples.  
 
Practical:  Shell scripting  
Self-Study Component:  Execution  of Wildcards  & UNIX  Shell  Programs                                                                                                  8 (CO5)  
Analyze  
 
 Course  Outcomes:  After  completing  the course,  the students  will be able to 
1. Apply  the concepts  of process management and process  scheduling techniques to enhance CPU 
efficiency and throughput.  
2. Apply  process synchronization mechanisms, Identify  the need  of policies and protection  required  in 
managing  deadlock  
3. Apply  memory  management  concepts to optimize memory usage and performance . 
4. Apply  the concepts  of Unix system  and file commands  to perform  various  tasks  in files and system.  
5. Analyze  the concepts  of file attributes and manage files through shell programming to automate t asks  
Reference  Books:  
1. Sumitabha  Das.,  Unix  Concepts  and Applications.,  4th Edition.,  Tata McGraw  Hill. 
2. Abraham  Silberschatz,  Peter  Baer  Galvin,  Greg  Gagne,  Operating  System  Principles  10th  
edition,  Wiley -India,  2018. 
3. William  Stallings, Operating  System: Internals  and Design Principles,  Prentice  Hall,  9th Edition,  2018.  
4. W. Richard  Stevens:  Advanced  Programming  in the UNIX  Environment,  2nd Edition,  Pearson  Education,  
2005  
5. Unix  System  Programming  Using  C++ - Terrence  Chan, PHI, 1999.  
Web  links  and Video  Lectures:  
1. https://academicearth.org/  
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105214/  
 
 
BNM Institute of Technology  
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning  
Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) and Outcome Based Education (OBE)  
Semester: IV  
Course Name: Database Management System   (PCI)     
Course Code: 24 AML143                                                                           
L: T: P: J 2:    0:    :2       :0 CIA Marks:  50 
Credits:       3 SEA  Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture 
Hours:       4 SEA  Duration:  03 Hours  
Course  Learning Objectives:  The students  will be able to  
1 Understand fundamental concepts, terminology and application of databases, SQL and NoSQL  
2 Design concepts and creation of relational databases using relation algebra.  
3 Practice  SQL  programming  through  a variety  of database  problems.  
4 Demonstrate  the use of Normalization, concurrency  and transactions  in database.  
 Module -1: Database  System  Concepts, Data  Modeling  No. of 
Hours  Blooms  
cognitive  
Levels  
Databases and Databases Users: Characteristics of database Approach, 
Advantages of using the DBMS Approach.  
Database System Concepts and Architecture: Data Models -Schemas and 
Instances, Three -Schema Architecture and Data Independence, 
Database Languages and Interfaces.  
Data Modeling Using the Entity -Relationship ( ER) Model: Entity 
Types -Entity sets - Attributes and Keys, Relationship types – 
Relationship Sets – Roles and structural Constraints, Weak Entity 
Types.  
 
Self-Study Components:  Actors on the scene and behind the scenes,  
DBMS component modules interaction  
 
Practical component:  
Draw  ER Diagram  for the following  Databases using  GitMind  software.  
Order  Database  
Library Database  
Bank Database  8+2 Understand  
CO1  
 Module -2: Relational Data Model and Relational Algebra  
Concept of relations, schema -instance distinction, keys, referential 
integrity and foreign keys, converting the database specification in E/R 
notation to the relational schema.  
relational algebra operators: selection, projection, set operators, cross 
product, various types of joins, division,  
Basic SQL: SQL Data Definition and Data Types, Specifying 
Constraints in SQL, Basic Retrieval Queries in SQL.  
 
Self-Study Components:  Example queries  
 
Practical component:  
Create Schema, insert at least 5 records in each table and add 
appropriate  constraints for the following Library Database using 
ORACLE or MySQL  DBMS  under  LINUX/Windows environment  
BOOK (Book_id, Title, Publisher_Name, Pub_Year)   8+2 Apply  
CO2  
BOOK_AUTHORS (Book_id, Author_Name)   
PUBLISHER (Name, Address, Phone)  
BOOK_COPIES (Book_id,  Branch_id , No-of_Copies)  
BOOK_LENDING (Book_id,  Br_id,  Card_No,  Date_Out,  Due_Date)   
LIBRARY_BRANCH (Branch_id,  Branch_Name, Address)  
 
Write  SQL  queries to  
1. Retrieve  details  of all books  in the library  – id, title, name  of 
publisher,  authors,  number  of copies in each branch, etc.  
2. Get the particulars  of borrowers  who have  borrowed  more  than 3 
books,  but from Jan 2020 to  Jun 2022.  
3. Delete  a book  in BOOK  table.  Update  the contents  of other  tables  
to reflect  this data  manipulation operation.  
 Module -3: SQL  
INSERT  – DELETE  and UPDATE  Statements in  SQL,  Additional 
features  in SQL  
More  SQL:  Complex  Queries,  Triggers,  Views  and Schema  
Modification:  Complex  SQL  Retrieval  Queries,  Specifying  Constraints  
as Assertions  and actions  as Triggers,  Views  (Virtual  Tables) in  SQL.  
 
Self-study components : Stored Procedures  
 
Practical component:  
Create Schema, insert at least 5 records for each table and add 
appropriate  constraints for the following Order Database using 
ORACLE or MySQL  DBMS  under  LINUX/Windows environm ent. 
SALESMAN (Salesman_id, Name, City, Commission)   
CUSTOMER (C_id, Cust_Name, City, Grade, Salesman_id)   
ORDERS (Ord_No,  Purchase_Amt,  Ord_Date,  C_id,  S_id)  
Write  SQL  queries to  
1. Count  the customers  with grades  above  Bangalore’s  average.  
2. Find the name  and numbers  of all salesman  who had more  than 
one customer.  
3. List all the salesman  and indicate  those  who have  and don’t  have  
customers  in their  cities (Use  UNION operation.)  
4. Create  a view  that finds  the salesman  who has the customer  with 
the highest order.  8+2 Apply  
CO3  
 Module -4: Functional Dependencies and Normalization  
Basics of Functional Dependencies and Normalization for Relational  
Database:  Informal design guidelines for relation schema, Functional 
Dependencies, Armstrong’s axioms for FD's, closure of a set of FDs, 
Equivalence of set FD’s, minimal covers, Normal forms Based on 
Primary Keys, General Definitions of Second and Third Normal Forms , 
Boyce - Codd Normal Forms [BCNF], Multivalued Dependency and 
Fourth Normal Form, Join Dependencies and Fifth Normal Form.  
 
Self-study Components:  Loss less Join Property and Dependency 
preservation property  
 
Practical component:  
Create Schema, insert at least 5 records for each table and add 
appropriate  constraints  for the following  Company  Database  using  
ORACLE  or MySQL  DBMS under  LINUX/Windows environment.  
EMPLOYEE (SSN, Name, Address, Sex, Salary, Super SSN, D No)  8+2 Analyze  
CO4  
 DEPARTMENT (D No, D Name, Mgr. SSN, Mgr. Start Date)  
DLOCATION(D No,D Loc)  
PROJECT (P No, P Name, P Location, D_No)  
WORKS_ON(SSN,  P No, Hours)  
Write  SQL  queries to  
1. Make a list of all project numbers for projects that involve an 
employee  whose last name is ‘Scott’, either as a worker or as a  manager 
of the  department  that controls  the project.  
2. Show the resulting salaries if every employee working on the ‘IoT’  
project  is given a  10 percent raise.  
3. Find the sum of the salaries  of all employees  of the ‘Accounts’  
department, as well as the maximum  salary and the  average  salary  in 
this department.  
Module -5: Transaction  Processing, Concurrency Control, NoSQL  
Introduction  to Transaction  Processing  –Introduction to Transaction 
Processing, Desirable  Properties on  Transactions (ACID)  
 
Concurrency Control Techniques: Transactions and Schedules, 
Serializability, Precedence Graphs, Concurrency, Lock Based 
Protocols: 2PL, Strict 2PL Protocols, Deadlocks - Detection and 
Prevention  
 
NoSQL:  SQL v/s NoSQL, The Emergence of NoSQL, BASE 
Properties, Schema less Database, Vector Database, Distributed 
Database.  
 
Self-study components: Graph Databases  8+2 Analyze  
CO5  
 
Project:  
Build a NoSQL -based web application using MongoDB , few applications are listed here but 
not restricted  to: 
1. Student Course Management System  
2. Library Management System  
3. To-Do App with User Authentication  
4. Personal Finance Tracker  
5. Online Polling System  
 
 
 Course  Outcomes:  After  completing  the course,  the students will  be able to 
CO1  Understand the  Database  System  Concepts along with Data  Modeling  Using  the 
Entity -Relationship  (ER)  Model  
CO2  Apply the concepts of relations on RDBMS, constraints,  joints using relational algebra 
operators.  
CO3  Apply Structured Query Language for database manipulation.  
CO4  Analyze functional dependencies to normalize relations of relational database  
CO5  Analyze transactions processing, schedules protocols, serializability issues, deadlocks in 
DBMS and concepts of NoSQL with its advantages  
Textbooks  
1. Ramez  Elmasari,  Shamkant  B Navathe “Fundamentals  of Database  Systems”,  Pearson,  
Seventh  Edition 2017.  
2. “Database System Concepts”, Silberschatz, H Korth, S Sudarshan, 6th Edition, McGraw -Hill, 
2010  
3. Pramod J Sadalage, Martin Fowler, “NOSQL Distilled”, Pearson, 2013  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER – IV 
Design and  Analysis  of Algorithms (PCI)  
Credit : 4 
Course  Code  24AML144  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:2:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students to  
 
 Understand and apply mathematical relations to analyze the asymptotic runtime complexity of 
algorithms.  
 Utilize brute force, divide and conquer, and decrease and conquer methodologies to solve various 
computational problems.  
 Synthesize efficient algorithms in common engineering design situations.  
 Solve problems using backtracking and branch and bound methods and  gain insights into the 
theoretical limits of algorithmic problem -solving and computational complexity.  
 Prerequisite: Data Structure Concepts and Java Programming  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  
Introduction : Notion of Algorithm, Fundamentals of Algorithmic Problem 
Solving, Fundamentals of the Analysis of Algorithmic Efficiency: Analysis 
framework , Asymptotic Notations  and Basic Efficiency Classes , Mathematical 
Analysis of Non -Recursive and Recursive Algorithms . 
  Self-Study : Space complexity  
Practical:  
1. Apply brute force technique to recursively implement the following  
a. Linear Search  
b. To find the maximum and minimum from a given list of n elements.  
2. There are 5 books in the shelf, find the number of ways to select 3 books   
from  5 books on the  shelf using  the NCR with recursion.  
3. Find the next three terms of the sequence 15, 23, 38, 61, … Fibonacci series  
of the given number  using  recursion.   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 
(CO1)  
Analyze  
Module -2: Brute Force , Divide and conquer  
Brute Force:  Selection  Sort  
Divide and Conquer:  General method:  Binary search, Recurrence equation for       
divide and conquer, Finding the Maximum and Minimum, Merge sort, Quick  sort, 
Strassen’s  matrix  multiplication.  Decrease  and Conquer  Approach:  Topological  
Sort.    
Self-Study : Space -Time Tradeoffs: Sorting by Counting, Input Enhancement in 
String Matching.  
 
Practical:  
1. Implement the Selection sort algorithm.  
2. Write a program to search for  a key in a given set of elements using 
the Binary  search method and find the time complexity required to find 
the key.  
3. Sort a given set of elements using the Merge  Sort method and 
determine  the time required to sort  the elements. Plot a graph of number  
of elements versus  time  taken. Specify  the time efficiency  class of this 
algorithm.  
4. Sort a given set of elements using Quick Sort method and determine  
the time required to sort  the elements. Plot a graph of number  of elements 
versus  time  taken. Specify  the time efficiency  class of this algorithm.  
5. Implement Topological  sort using the source  removal method to 
find the time required to sort the  elements.   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 (CO2 )  
Apply  
Module -3: Greedy  Method  
Greedy Method:  General method, Coin Change Problem, Knapsack Problem,  
Job sequencing  with deadlines.  Minimum  cost spanning  trees:  Prim’s  
Algorithm,  Kruskal’s  Algorithm.  Single  source  shortest  paths:  Dijkstra's  
Algorithm.  Optimal Tree problem: Huffman Trees  and Codes.  
Self-Study : Minimize Number of Platforms (Train Station Problem)  
Practical:  
1. Write  a program  to find maximum  profit using  the Knapsack  technique.  
2. Implement  Prim’s  algorithm  and Find Minimum  Cost Spanning  Tree 
of a given connected undirected  graph.  
3. Implement  Kruskal’s  algorithm  and Find Minimum  Cost Spanning  
Tree of a given connected undirected graph.  
4. Implement  Dijkstra’s  algorithm  finds  shortest  paths  to other  vertices  
from  a given vertex  in a weighted connected  graph.   
 
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 
(CO3)  
Apply  
Module -4: Dynamic  Programming  
The General Method  with examples,  Multistage Graphs.  Transitive  Closure:  
Warshall’s  Algorithm, Floyd’s Algorithm for the All -Pairs Shortest Paths 
Problem, Single -Source Shortest Paths: General Weights, 0/1 Knapsack, The 
Traveling Salesperson problem . 
Self-Study:  Longest Common Subsequence  
Practical:  
1. Implement  all-pairs  shortest  paths  problem  using  Floyd’s  algorithm.  
2. Implement transitive  closure problem  using  Warshal’s  
algorithm . 
3. Implement 0/1 Knapsack using Dynamic Programming.  
4. Implementation  of Bellman  Ford Algorithm  using  a directed  graph.   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 
(CO4)  
Apply  
5. Implementation  of Travelling  Salesman  Problem  using  dynamic 
programming.  
Module -5: Backtracking  
Backtracking : General  method (T2:7.1),  Backtracking: n - Queens problem,  
Hamiltonian Circuit Problem, Subset – Sum Problem , Graph coloring, 
Branch -and-Bound:  Assignment Problem, Knapsack Problem, Traveling 
Salesperson  Problem.  Basic concepts of P, NP, NP-Complete and NP -Hard  
Problems, Challenges of Numerical Algorithms.  
Self -Study: Approximation algorithms  
Practical:  
1. Implementation  of N Queen  Problem  using  Backtracking  technique.  
2. Implementation  of SUM -SUBSET  Problem.  
3. Design and implement the Hamiltonian  Cycle in an undirected Graph 
G of n vertices.  
4. Implementation of  0/1 Knapsack Problem  using  Branch and Bound .  
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 
(CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:  
The students  will be  able to 
1. Analyze the asymptotic runtime complexity of algorithms by using mathematical 
relations that help to identify them in specific instances.  
2. Apply and solve problems using brute force, divide and conquer techniques , decrease and 
conquer . 
3. Apply problem -solving  methodologies such as greedy  methods  to solve a given problem.  
4. Apply dynamic programming to estimate the computational complexity of different 
algorithms.  
5. Apply and solve problems us ing backtracking, branch and bound methods and describe 
P, NP and NP Complete problems.   
Reference  Books:  
1. Anany  Levitin,  Introduction  to the Design  and Analysis  of Algorithms,  Pearson,  2nd Edition,  
2009]  
2. Thomas  H. Cormen,  Charles  E. Leiserson,  Ronal  L. Rivest,  Clifford  Stein,  Introduction  to 
Algorithms,  PHI, 3rd Edition  
3. Ellis Horowitz,  Satraj  Sahni  and Rajasekaran,  Computer  Algorithms/C++,  Universities  Press,  
2nd Edition, 2014.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – IV 
 Machine  Learning  (PCI)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML145  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  1:2:2:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Understand the basic concepts of learning, machine learning and its landscape,  
 Understand the concept of linear  models for classification and regression,  
 Understand the concepts of decision trees and support vector machines,  
 Understand the concept of ensemble learning, and  
 Understand model -free learning over instance -based learning . 
 
Prerequisites: Python, Linear A lgebra  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module  1: Introduction to Machine Learning  
Machine Learning Landscape: Types of Machine Learning (ML), Main 
Challenges of ML, Testing and Validation  
Typical End -to-End Machine Learning Project:  Working with Real Data, 
The Big Picture, Getting Data, Discovering and Visualizing the Data, Data 
Preparation - Feature engineering , Selecting and Training Models  
Practical:  
1. Build a simple linear model to predict the life satisfaction index of a 
country given its GDP considering an appropriate  dataset.  
2. Perform data preprocessing and transformation considering an 
appropriate dataset.  
Self-Study: Model Optimization -Fine Tuning M odel.  6+4  (CO1)  
Apply  
Module  2: Linear Models  
Linear Models for Classification : Binary Classifier, Measuring Performance, 
Multiclass Classification, Multilabel Binary and Multilabel Multiclass 
Classification (Multioutput Classification), Error Analysis, Logistic Regression  6+4 (CO2)  
Apply  
Linear Models for Regression: Linear Regression, Gradient Descent , 
Polynomial Regression, Learning Curves, Regularized Linear Models (Ridge 
Regression, Lasso Regression, Elastic Net Regression)  
Practical:  
1. Build a machine learning model to classify a handwritten digit using a 
linear model.  
2. Build a machine learning model to predict California house prices using 
different linear models . 
 
Self-Study:  Early Stopping  
Module  3: Non-linear Models  
Support Vector Machines : Linear and Non -linear Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) Classification, SVM Regression, Training Linear SVM Classifiers  
Decision Trees : Training and Visualizing Decision Tree, Making Predictions, 
Estimating Class Probabilities, ID3 and CART Algorithm, Computational 
Complexity, Impurity Measurement – Gini and Entropy , Regularization, 
Regression  
Practical:  
1. Build a machine learning model us ing both linear and kernelized SVM 
algorithms to predict wine class considering Wine recognition dataset.  
2. Build a decision tree classifier to classify Iris flower species.  
Self-Study:  Issues in Decision Trees – Sensitivity to Axis Orientation and High 
Variance  6+4  (CO3)  
Apply  
Module  4: Ensemble Learning  
V oting Classifiers, Bootstrap Aggregating (Bagging), Pasting, Out -of-bag 
Evaluation, Random Patches, Random Subspaces, Random Forests, Boosting 
– Adaptive and Gradient Boosting  
Practical:  
1. Implement a voting classifier to classify handwritten digits from 
MNIST dataset.  
2. Implement a stacked ensemble for classification on an appropriate 
dataset and check if it can outperform a voting ensemble.  
Self-Study:  Stacking  6+4 (CO4)  
Apply  
Module  5: Instance -based Learning  
k-Nearest Neighbor Learning - Distance -Weighted Nearest Neighbor 
Algorithm and remarks; Locally Weighted Regression - Locally Weighted 
Linear Regression and remarks; Radial Basis Function;  
Practical:  
1. Implement a k-Nearest Neighbor algorithm to classify an instance of 
an appropriate dataset and compare the prediction performance.  
2. Implement a locally weighted linear regression algorithm for a 
regression task considering an appropriate dataset.  
Self-Study: Cased -based Reasoning; Remarks on Lazy and Eager Learning  6+4 (CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be able to  
1. Apply the basic concepts learning and basic machine learning theory in machine learning 
problems.  
2. Apply linear models for classification and regression tasks.  
3. Apply decision trees and support vector machines in appr opriate machine learning problems.  
4. Apply ensemble learning to achieve relatively better model performance than individual ones.  
5. Apply instance -based learning using k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm in classification and 
regression tasks . 
Reference Books:  
1. Aurélien Géron. Hands -on Machine Learning with Scikit -Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow , Third 
Edition, O ’Reilly, 2022  
2. Tom M. Mitchell. Machine Learning , McGraw Hill Education, Indian Edition, 2013  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – IV 
Cloud  Computing  & Applications  (PBL)  
Credit:  2 
Course  Code  24AML146  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 0:0:2:2  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture Hours  30 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students to 
 Acquire  knowledge  and be exposed  to tool kits for cloud Environment.  
 Understand  the representation  and familiar  with developing  web services  / Applications  in cloud 
environment.  
 Develop  the ability  to run Virtual  machines  of different Configuration  
 Develop  the ability  to implement and use  parallel  programming  using  Hadoop.  
Prerequisites:  
Fundamental knowledge of CS, OS, networks, programming (Java/Python), web tech, databases, Linux, 
virtualization, and basic cloud platform concepts.  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Task  – 1 
Introduction, Cloud Infrastructure: Cloud computing, Cloud computing delivery 
models and services, Ethical issues, Cloud vulnerabilities, Cloud computing at 
Amazon, Cloud computing the Google perspective, Microsoft Windows Azure and 
online services, Openso urce software platforms for private clouds, Cloud storage 
diversity and vendor lock -in. Cloud Deployment Models, Benefits and Challenges of 
Cloud Computing  
Self-Study: Explore one open -source cloud platform (e.g., OpenStack, Eucalyptus, 
NextCloud)  
 4 Understand  
Task  – 2 
Virtualization in Cloud Computing and Types : What is Virtualization? Why is 
Virtualization Important? Virtualization Example How does Virtualization Work,  
Virtual Machines (Cloud Instances) Types of Virtualization: Application 
Virtualization, Network Virtualization,  Desktop Virtualization, Storage Virtualization, 
Server Virtualization,  Data virtualization ; Benefits of Virtualization; Drawback of 
Virtualization; Characteristics of Virtualization; Virtualization vs Containerization  
Uses of Virtualization  
Task for Execution:  Setting up a VIRTUALBOX/VMware Wor kstation, install a C 
Compiler in the virtual machine and execute a sample program  
 
Self-Study:  Choose an organization or industry (e.g., banking, education, healthcare) 
and research how they use virtualization. Prepare a 1 -page case study summary or 
short  presentation on it.  4 Apply  
Task  – 3 
Introduction:  What is Git? What is Git History? Why Use It? Where to use Git? Key 
Git Concepts: Repository, Clone, Stage, Commit, Branch, Merge, Pull, Push  
 
Task for Execution :  Creating a GIT repository  and executing the control  system  2 Apply  
commands  to Clone,  Commit,  Push,  Fetch,  Pull, Checkout,  Reset  and Delete  
 
Self-Study: Simulate a merge conflict in a Git repo. Study how .gitignore  works.  
Create a sample .gitignore  for a Python/Node.js/Java project.  
Task  – 4 
What is Google App Engine? Features of App Engine, Advantages of Google App 
Engine.  
Task for Execution : Install GOOGLE APP ENGINE and Host A Static Website On 
GOOGLE APP ENGINE  
Self-Study: Deep dive into the app.yaml  configuration file. Understand the key 
fields: runtime, handlers, env_variables, automatic_scaling  2 Apply  
Task  – 5 
What is Cloudsim? Benefits of simulation over the actual deployment, Why use 
Cloudsim?, Cloudsim Architecture, Features of Cloudsim , Installation Steps,  
 
Task for Execution:  Simulate A Cloud Scenario Using Cloudsim And Run A 
Scheduling Algorithm ThatIs Not Present In Cloudsim  
Self-Study:  Research how researchers and industry professionals use CloudSim for: 
Testing Scheduling policies , Performance evaluation, Cost estimation.  2 Apply  
Task  – 6 
AWS Data Services: Identity Access Management - IAM, Elastic Cloud 
Compute - EC2, AWS RDS, AWS Glue, AWS Redshift, AWS EMR, AWS - 
Dynamo DB, AWS QuickSight, AWS SageMaker  
GCP Data Services : Compute Engine, Cloud Storage, Cloud SQL, Spanner, 
Datastore, Bigtable, BigQuery, Data Proc, DataFlow, Cloud Composer, 
Dataprep, Data Fusion, Cloud AutoML, Looker  
 Task for Execution: To steup an AWS account and explore the services offered by 
AWS  
Self-Study: Use Amazon S3 to create a public bucket and host a static HTML website  2 Apply  
Task  – 7 
What is Docker? Why Docker is Popular? Key Components of Docker, What is 
a Dockerfile ? What is Docker Architecture and How Docker Works? What is 
Docker Image? What is Docker Container? What is Docker Hub? Docker 
Commands  
Task for Execution: Install Docker and Verify Installation Execute the different docker 
commands like : run, pull, ps, s top, start, rm, RMI, images, exec, ports, push, build, 
restart, inspection  
Self-Study:  Create two containers (e.g., a web server and a database) and connect them 
using Docker’s bridge network.  2 Apply  
Task  – 8 
 Build a Docker Image from a Simple Application  
 Run Multiple Containers Using Docker Compose  
 
Self-Study:  Build a CI/CD Pipeline with Docker and Jenkins  
 2 Apply  
Task  – 9 
Introduction to Kubernetes, What  is Kubernetes? Key Terminologies, Benefits of 
using Kubernetes, Deploying and Managing Containerized Applications with 
Kubernetes, Use Cases of Kubernetes in Real -World Scenarios, Features of 
Kubernetes, Kubernetes v/s Docker, Architecture of Kubernetes, Key Components of 
Kubernetes, Application of Kubernetes  
 
Task for Execution: Install and Configure Kubernetes on Ubuntu  
Self-Study: Research what Helm  is? Install Helm and deploy a chart (e.g., NGINX or 
WordPress).  
 2 Apply  
Task  – 10 
Introduction to Azure - Overview of Microsoft Azure , How Microsoft Azure work? 
Microsoft Azure architecture, Features of Azure, What is Microsoft Azure Used For? 
What are the various Azure Services and How does Azure Work? Azure for Disaster 
Recovery and Backup, Azure Com petition How Azure can help in Business? What is 
Azure Cloud Shell? How to Access Azure Shell? How Azure Security Works?  
Difference between AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure.  
 Task for Execution:  
Setting up an Azure account  
Creating an azure account and implement data load  
Implementation  of database  operations  like insert,  delete,  update  using  azure  data 
factory.  
Self-Study: Create and deploy a simple Web App  using App Services (e.g., Node.js 
or Python).  2 Apply  
Task – 11   
What is Edge AI? Key Components of Edge AI, Benefits of Edge AI, Use Cases and 
Applications of Edge AI, Challenges and Limitations of Edge AI, Future Trends of 
Edge AI, Comparision of Edge AI & CloudAI  
Self-Study:  Research popular edge AI hardware: Raspberry Pi, NVIDIA Jetson Nano, 
Google Coral, Intel Neural Compute Stick, ESP32.    
Mini  Project  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
Identify the architecture, infrastructure and delivery models of cloud computing   
Understand the core functions of AWS & Azure services and apply them to deploy virtual servers, manage 
storage solutions, and configure relational databases.  
3. Create an d manage Git repositories by executing version control commands  
4.Learn  how to simulate  a cloud  environment to  implement  new schedulers.  
 Install  and use a generic  cloud environment  that can be  used as a private  cloud.  
Reference Books  
1. Cloud Computing: Theory and Practice, Dan C Marinescu Elsevier (MK), 2013.  
2. Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture  Thomas Erl, Ricardo Puttini, Zaigham Mahmood Latest 
(2023) Pearson Education  
3. Computing Principles and Paradigms, RajkumarBuyya ,  James Broberg, Andrzej Goscinsk,i Willey, 2014.  
4. Cloud Computing Implementation, Management and Security John W Rittinghouse, James F Ransome, CRC Press, 
2013.  
Web Links  
1. https: //www.w3schools.com/git/git_intro.asp?remote=github  
2. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/what -is-cloudsim/  
3. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/what -is-google -app-engine -gae/ 
4. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/apex/apex_overview.htm  
 
 
 
 
 



B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – V 
 Software Engineering, Project Management and Finance  (PCC)  
Credit: 3  
Course  Code  24AML151  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
 Course Learning Objectives:  
 This course will enable students to  
 Identify ethical and professional issues and explain why they are of concern to software 
engineers.  
 Recognize the importance of software maintenance and describe the intricacies involved in 
software evolution.  
 Apply estimation techniques, schedule project activities and compute pricing.  
 Identify software quality parameter s and quantify software using measurements and metrics.  
 Recognize the need for agile software development, describe agile methods, apply agile 
practices and plan for agility.  
Prerequisites:  
Basic knowledge of programming, math, logic, software evolution, q uality, and ethical practices in 
software engineering.  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  
Introduction:  Software Crisis, Need for Software Engineering. 
Professional Sof tware Development, Software Engineering Ethics. Case 
Studies.  
Software Processes:  Models: Waterfall Model, Incremental Model and 
Spiral Model, Process activities.  
Requirements Engineering:  Requirements Engineering Processes : 
Feasibility studies, requirements elicitation and analysis, requirements 
specification , requirements validation, requirements management , 
Functional and non -functional requirements.  
Self-Study : Software  Requirements Document.  8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: System Models , Design and Implementation , Software Testing  
System Models:  Structural models, Behavioral models , UML modeling 
using StarUml tool.  
Design and Implementation : Introduction to RUP, Design Principles  
Software Testing:  Development testing , Release testing, User testing , Test-
driven development ,  
Self-Study : software architecture, data design, architectural styles and 
patterns  8 (CO2)  
Apply  
Module -3: Project management, Project Planning, Quality management  
Project management: Risk management, Managing People, Teamwork.  8 (CO3)  
Project Planning: Software pricing, Plan -driven development, Project 
Planning & Project scheduling  Objectives,  Estimation techniques,  
Availability of manpower  and release of funds - cost and time trade cost.  
Quality management: Software quality, Reviews and inspections , 
Software measurement and metrics   
Self-Study : Software standards  Apply  
Module -4: Agile Software Development  
Agile Software Development: Coping with Change, The Agile  Manifesto: 
Values and Principles. Agile methods: SCRUM (Ref ―The SCRUM 
Primer, Ver 20.) and Extreme Programming. Plan -driven and agile 
development. Kanban: Key Principles, Benefits of Kanban . 
Self-Study:  Agile project management, Scaling agile methods.  8 (CO4)  
Apply  
Module -5: Managing Project Finances  
How to Manage Project Finances -Cost estimating: Work Breakdown 
Structure, Cost budgeting: Cost Aggregation, Reserve Analysis, Parametric 
estimating, Infrastructure and overheads, Cost control: Change Control, 
Resource Management , Control Techniques - PERT, CPM -Proper Review – 
Project Audit.  
Performance Measurement and Analysis - Cost Variance,  Earned Value, 
Schedule Variance, Cost Performance Index,  Schedule Performance Index . 
Introduction of Tools to manage project Finances - TouchBase Project 
Financials  
Self-Study : Forecasting, Project Coordination - Factors influencing 
effective project management - project time monitoring.  8 (CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
1. Understand the activities involved in software engineering and identify  the role of various  
Process  models.  
2. Design a software system, component, or process to meet desired needs within realistic 
constraints  and d escribe various software testing methods  
3. Illustrate the role of project planning and quality management in software development.  
4. Describe agile project management and benefits of using agile approaches.  
5. Understanding financial concepts and apply them to control Project Costs.  
Reference Books:  
1. Software Engineering Ian Sommerville Pearson Education 10th Edition, 2012  
2. Software Engineering Ian Sommerville Pearson Education 9th Edition, 2012  
3. Software Engineering -A Practitioner approach Roger S. Pressman Tata McGraw Hil 9th Edition  
4. An Integrated Approach to Software Engineering Pankaj Jalote Wiley India  
5. A guide to the project Management body of knowledge - PMBOK guide , 7th edition  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – V 
 Automata Theory and Computations  (PCC)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML152  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 2:1:1:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Prerequisite Concepts: Data Structures, Algorithms and Complexity, Discrete Mathematics  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Introduce core concepts in automata and theory of computation . 
 Identify different formal language classes and their relationships.  
 Design grammars and recognizers for different formal languages.  
 Prove or disprove theorems in automata theorem  using their properties.  
 Determine the decidability and intractability of Computational problems.  
 Design and develop lexical analyzers  and parsers . 
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  
Why study the Theory of Computation, Languages and Strings: Strings, Languages. 
A Language Hierarchy, Computation, Finite State Machines (FSM): Deterministic 
FSM, Regular languages, Designing FSM, Nondeterministic FSMs, Minimizing 
FSMs, Canonical form of R egular languages, Finite State Transducers, Bidirectional 
Transducers.  
Self-Study Components:  ε- NFA.  
Use Case : Construct different kinds of FSM using JFLAP  
 Python program to construct a DFA which accept the language L = {anbm | n mod 
2=0, m ≥1} 
 Python program to construct nfa for the language nfa (a|b)*abb  8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Regular Expressions & Languages  
Regular Expressions (RE): Introduction to RE, Kleene’s theorem, Manipulating and 
Simplifying REs.  Regular Grammars: Definition, Regular Grammars and Regular 
languages. Regular Languages (RL) and Non regular Languages: How many RLs, 
To show that a language is regular, to show some languages are not RLs.  
Self-Study Components: Applications of REs, Closure properties of RLs  
Use Case : Develop regular grammars and check closure properties using JFLAP  
 Python program for matching a Regular Expression.  
 Python program for Regular Grammar.  8 (CO1) 
Apply  
  
Module -3: Context -Free Grammars  & Pushdown Automata  
Context -Free Grammars(CFG) : Introduction to Rewrite Systems and  Grammars, 
CFGs  and languages, designing CFGs, simplifying CFGs, proving  that a Grammar 
is correct,  Derivation and Parse trees, Ambiguity, Normal  Forms.  
Pushdown Automata (PDA) : Definition o f non -deterministic PDA, Deterministic 
and Non -deterministic PDAs.  
Self-Study Components:  Nondeterminism and Halting, alternative equivalent 
definitions of a PDA, alternatives that are not equivalent to PDA.  
Use Case : Construct PDA for the context free grammar using using JFLAP  
 Derive a parse tree using python programming  
 Construct a PDA using python programming for a set of languages  8 (CO2) 
Apply  
Module -4: Turing Machine  
Turing Machine : Turing machine model, Representation, Language acceptability 
by TM, design of TM, Techniques for TM construction. Variants of Turing 
Machines (TM), The model of Linear Bounded automata. Decidability: Definition 
of an algorithm, decidability, decidable la nguages, Undecidable languages, halting 
problem of TM, Post correspondence problem.  
Self-Study Components: Complexity: Growth rate of functions, the classes of P 
and NP, Quantum Computation: quantum computers, Church -Turing thesis . 
Applications: G.1 Defining syntax of programming language.  
 
Use Case : Construct Turing machine and check decidability and undecidability of 
languages using JFLAP  
 Construct a DTM which matches all strings beginning with '0's, and followed 
by the same number of '1's  
 Turing machine for the language L = {a^mb^na^mb^n ∣ m,n≥0}  8 (CO3) 
Apply  
Module -5: Lexical Analysis  & Syntax Analysis  
Lexical Analysis : role of lexical analyzer, input buffering, specification of tokens, 
recognition of tokens, design of lexical analyzer generator.  
Syntax analysis : role of parser, top down parsing, bottom up parsing, operator 
precedence parsing, LR parsers, parser generators.  
Self-Study Components: language for specifying lexical analyzers, from Regular 
expression to NFA,   
Use Case : Apply Automata concepts to check syntax of programming language.  
 Implement lexical analyzer using python  8 (CO4) 
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be able to:  
1. Apply the core concepts of Automata Theory and Computation and convert different automata 
models , Regular Expressions  to FSM.  (Apply)  
2. Develop Grammars and Automata for different language classes . (Apply)  
3. Apply the concept of  Turing machine , decidability and undecidability on the grammar  (Apply)  
4. Design and develop lexical analyzers and parsers.  (Apply)  
5. Analyze different type for models using simulators (Analyze)  
  
Reference Books : 
1. Elaine Rich, Automata, Computability and Complexity, 1st Edition, Pearson Education, 2018.  
2. K L P Mishra, N Chandrasekaran, 3rd Edition, Theory of Computer Science, PHI, 2012.  
3. John E Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, Jeffery D Ullman, Introduction to Automata  Theory, Languages, 
and Computation, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education, 2013  
4. Alfred V Aho, Monica S Lam, Ravi Sethi, Jeffrey D. Ullman, Compilers -Principles, Techniques and 
Tools, Pearson, 2nd Edition, 2013.  
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Computer Networks and Security (PCI)  
Credit: 4  
SEMESTER – V 
Course  Code  24AML153  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:2:0  SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  50 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Apply the networking components, models , and topologies  to solve various real time problems.  
 Describe and apply the physical layer, data link layer, network layer, transport layer and 
application layer architectures, protocols and services Provided by each layer for networking.  
 Identify the security threats, vulnerabilities and services along with applying cry ptographic 
solutions for it.  
 Analyze a data transmission at different layer and parameter measures for real time network using 
simulation tools.  
Prerequisite: Basics of coding, Mathematics  
Module 1: Introduction  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Data communication : Components, Data representation, Data flow, Networks: 
Network criteria, Physical Structures, Network types: LAN, WAN, Switching, The 
Internet.  TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE, Layered Architecture, Layers in the TCP/IP 
Protocol Suite, Description of Each Layer, Encapsulation and De -capsulation, 
Addressing, Multiplexing and De -multiplexing, OSI versus TCP/IP.  
Physical Layer : Data and Signals, Periodic analog signals, digital signals, 
Transmission impairment.  
Practical Component using NS2:  
1. Implement thr ee nodes point – to – point network with duplex links between 
them.  
2. Implement the following topologies: Bus, Star, Ring  
Self-Study: Line coding schemes   
 
6+4  
 
(CO1)
Apply  
Module 2: Data Link Layer   
Data -Link Layer : Nodes and Links, Services, Two Categories  of link, Sublayers, 
Link Layer addressing: Types of addresses, ARP. Data Link Control (DLC) 
services: Framing, Flow and Error Control, Data Link Layer Protocols: Simple 
Protocol, Stop and Wait protocol, Wired and Wireless LANs: Ethernet Protocol , 
Standard Ethernet.  
Practical Component using NS2:  
1. Implement transmission of ping messages/trace route over a network topology 
consisting of 6 nodes and find the number of packets dropped due to congestion.  
2. Implement an Ethernet LAN using n nodes and set multiple traffic nodes and 
plot congestion window for different source / destination.  
Self-Study: Error detection and correction: CRC   
 
6+4  
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
Module 3: Network Layer   
Network Layer: Introduction, Network Layer services: Packetizing, Routing and 
Forwarding, Packet Switching: Datagram Approach, Virtual Circuit Approach.  
IPV4 Addresses: Address Space, Classful Addressing, Classless Addressing, 
DHCP, Network Address Resolution, Distance Vector Routing, Link State Routing, 
Path vector routing.  
Practical Component using NS2:  
1. Simulation of distance vector routing algorithm.  
2. Simulation of link state routing algorithm  
Self-Study: IPV6 Addressing   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO3)  
Apply  
Module 4: Transport and Application Layer   
Transport Layer : Introduction: Transport Layer Services, Connectionless and 
Connection -oriented Protocols, Transport  Layer Protocols: Simple protocol, Stop 
and wait protocol, Go -Back -N Protocol, Transport -Layer Protocols in the Internet: 
User Datagram Protocol: User Datagram, UDP Services, Transmission Control 
Protocol: TCP Services, TCP Features.  
Application Layer:  Introduction: providing services, Application - layer paradigms, 
Standard Client -Server Protocols: World wide web, Hyper Text Transfer Protocol, 
FTP: Domain Name system.  
Practical Component using NS2:  
1. Implement Transport Control Protocol in sensor network  
2. Implement User Datagram protocol in sensor network  
3. Simulation of stop and wait protocol and sliding window protocol  
Cisco Packet Tracer:  
4. Configuration of TELNET protocols on router for remote access.  
Self-Study: Electronic Mail   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(CO3)  
Apply   
Module 5: Network Security   
Security Introduction , Attacks, Services, Mechanism, network security, 
Cryptography,  DES, AES, Public -Key Cryptography: RSA, Hash and MAC 
Algorithms: Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA), Digital Signatures.  
Practical Component  using JAVA:  
1. Write a Java program to implement the DES algorithm logic  
2. Write a Java program to implement RSA Algorithm   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO4)
Apply  
 
 3. Calculate the message digest of a text using the SHA -1 algorithm in JAVA.  
4. Basic lab Program using POSTMAN API.  
Self-Study: Diffie -Hellman  Key Exchange  
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Apply the concepts of networking and data transmission to solve various real time problems.  
2. Apply the various services and protocols of data link layer.  
3. Apply and analyze the various networking architectures, protocols and services of network and 
transport layers for real time networking.  
4. Identify the networks security, threats, and vulnerabilities and Apply the different cryptographic 
operations.  
Reference Books  
1. Behrouz A Forouzan, "Data Communications and Networking", 5th Edition, McGraw Hill, 2013, 
ISBN: 1 -25-906475 -3. 
2. Cryptography and Network Security Principles and Practice Fourth Edition, William Stallings, 
Pearson Education  
3. James  J Kurose, Keith W Ross, "Computer Networks", Pearson Education.  
4. Andrew S Tanenbaum, 'Computer Networks", Prentice Hall.  
5. Modern Cryptography: Theory and Practice, by Wenbo Mao, Prentice Hall PTR  
6. Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, by William Stallings. Prentice Hall  
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Advanced  Machine  Learning  (PCI)  
Credit: 4  
SEMESTER – V 
Course  Code  24AML154  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  3:0:2:0 SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  50 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Understand concerns related to dimensionality and various approaches for efficient model training and 
data visualization,   
 Understand unsupervised learning techniques, and perform clustering and anomaly detection,  
 Understand the fundamentals of time -series and perform modeling to forecast over time -series data,  
 Understand various approaches towards instance - or memory -based learning and build models, and  
 Learn the concept and implementation of brain -inspired  artificial neural networks.  
 
Prerequisites: P ython, Machine Learning Basics  
Module 1: Dimensionality Reduction  Number 
of Hours  Bloom
’s 
Level  
Curse of Dimensionality, Main Approaches for Dimensionality Reduction – Projection and 
Manifold Learning, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Random Projection, Locally 
Linear Embedding , Other Dimensionality Reduction Techniques – t-Distributed Stochastic 
Neighbor Embedding (t -SNE)  
Practical:  
1. Apply PCA to reduce an appropriate dataset preserving a given explained variance.  
2. Consider the same or an appropriate dataset to experiment with data decompression 
and incremental PCA.  
 
Self-Study:  Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
   
 
Apply  
[CO1]  
Module 2:  Clustering   
k-Means – The k-Means algorithm, Centroid initialization methods, Accelerated k-Means 
and mini -batch k-Means, Finding the optimal number of clusters; Limits of k-Means, 
Clustering for Semi -Supervised Learning; DB Scan ; Other Clustering Algorithms  
Gaussian Mixtures – Gaussian Mixtures for Anomaly Detection, Selecting the Number of 
Clusters, Bayesian Gaussian Mixture Models  
Practical:  
1. Develop a program to apply k-Means algorithm to cluster a set of instances on an 
appropriate dataset.  
2. Develop a program to train a Gaussian mixture model on an appropriate dataset. 
Use the model to generate some new samples and visualize them.  
 
Self-Study:  Anomaly and Novelty Detection, Other Algorithms for Association Rule   
 
 
 
 
 
6+4  
  
 
 
 
Apply  
[CO2]  
 Module 3:  Time -series Forecasting   
Introduction to time -series forecasting, Components and decomposition, building  baseline 
models with naive approaches ; Random Walk  – Stationarity , Autocorrelation function  
(ACF) ; Moving Average  Process , Autoregress ive Process - Autoregressive Moving 
Average  (ARMA) model  
Practical:  
1. Consider an appropriate time -series dataset and forecast using a base model  and a 
moving average model.  
Self-Study: ARIMA and Seasonal ARIMA model   
 
 
6+4   
 
 
Apply  
[CO3]  
Module 4:  Bayesian  Learning   
Bayes Theorem and Concept Learning . Maximum Likelihood Hypothesis and Least -
Squared Error Hypotheses , Minimum Description Length Principle, Bayes Optimal 
Classifier , Gibbs Algorithm, Naive Bayes Classifier , Bayesian Belief Network .  
Practical:  
1. Draw a Bayesian belief network that represents the conditional independence 
assumptions of the naive Bayes classifier for an appropriate problem. Give the 
conditional probability table(s) associated with specified  nodes . 
2. Give  the conditional  probability  table(s)  associated  with specified  node(s)  
Self-Study:   Expectation -Maximization (EM) Algorithm   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
  
 
 
 
Apply  
[CO4]  
Module 5:  Artificial Neural Networks   
From Biological to Artificial Neurons : Biological Neurons, Logical Computations with 
Neurons, The Perceptron, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Backpropagation, Regression 
& Classification MLPs  
Implementing MLPs with Keras : Classification and Regression MLPs using the 
Sequential API, Complex Models using the Functional API, Callbacks  
Practical:  
1. Use Scikit -Learn to build an MLP , train on appropriate dataset for a regression task, 
perform predictions and then measure performance.  
2. Use Keras sequential API to build and train a multiclass image classifier model, 
perform classification, and then evaluate performance.  
Self-Study:  Fine-Tuning Neural Network Hyperparameters, TensorBoard   
 
 
 
6+4   
 
 
 
Apply  
[CO5
] 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Apply dimensionality reduction techniques for efficient model training and data visualization  
2. Apply clustering, and detect abnormal (anomaly) and unusual (novelty) observations,  
3. Perform forecasting by implementing appropriate models over time -series data,  
4. Implement appropriate instance -based learning algorithms to solve relevant prediction tasks,  and 
5. Implement regression and classification using MLPs.  
Reference Books  
1. Aurélien Géron. Hands -on Machine Learning with Scikit -Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow , Third Edition, 
O’Reilly, 2025  
2. Marco Peixeiro. Time Series Forecasting in Python , Manning, 2022  
3. Tom M. Mitchell, Machine Learning , McGraw -Hill Education, 2013  
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER - V 
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality ( PBL)  
Credit 2  
Course Code  24AML155  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P:J)  0:0:2:2  SEA Marks  50 
Total Number of Hours  30 Exam Hours  03 
Course Learning Objectives:  
1. Experience the fundamental Computer Vision, Comput er Graphics and Human -Computer 
Interaction Techniques related to VR/AR  
2. Demonstrate the  Geometric Modelling Techniques Review the Virtual Environment  
3. Develop VR/AR Technologies Simulate and Apply Virtual/Augmented Reality to varieties 
of Applications.  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom ’s 
Level  
Module – 1: Blender Introduction  
Blender Introduction  
Demonstrate Blender Interface, Overlay Reference, Position on 
Overlay, Managing Layouts, Camera Overlay ,  Demonstrate Scene 
view navigation, Scene view camera, Game View ,Project Creation, 
Plane creation, cube creation, Explanation of cube camera and 
positi on, Material Selection, and class file same, adding motion to the 
script, Run , Understanding different 3D projectiles . 
Practical using Blender  
1. Using Blender develop a logo of a company.  
2. Using Blender develop Donut.   
 
 
 
 
4+ 2 
(Project)   
 
 
 
 
Apply  
 
Module – 2: Unity  Programming  
Unity Programming  
Show the use of Unity  for Creating, loading and saving the scenes.  
Demonstrate the Transforms, Components, 3D objects, creating 
components, Saving the work.  Demonstrate the Layers, Constraints, 
Editor Feature 3d mode, Preferences, Build settings, Sculpting, 
preference add Ons ,Installation of XR device, Viewing through the 
XR. 
Practical using Unity  
1. Using Blender develop a house and port it to unity.  
2. Using Blender develop a windmill and port it to unity.  
3. Using Blender develop an animation character and port it to 
Unity.  
4. Using Unity Programming develop an solar system animation.   
 
 
 
4+2 
(Project)   
 
 
 
 
Apply  
 
Module – 3: Graphics  
Graphics  
Demonstrate the use of Render Pipelines, Cameras, lighting, models, 
mirroring objects , Demonstrate the use of Meshes, Textures, shaders, 
materials, Image Textures , Demonstrate the concept Visual effects, 
sky, colour for suitable example , Demonstrate the concept of World 
Build ing, Terrain, tree Editor for suitable example , Demonstrate  XR 
Plug-in Management, Installation of packages ,Demonstrate  Creation 
of left -hand, left -hand Controller and right -hand controller , Setting up 
the unity and programming using Unity.  
Practical using Unity  
 
1. Using Unity Develop a game Floppy bird.  
2. Setup Unity in the oculus quest and view the projects in the 
Oculus Quest.   
 
 
4+2 
(Project)   
 
 
 
Apply  
 
Module -4: Scripting, Audio Video and Animation  
Scripting, Audio Video and Animation  
Demonstrate the Setting up scripting Environment , Apply the 
concepts for Creating frames, creating .mkv files, namespaces, 
attributes , audio files, tracker Modules, Audio Group inspector , 
Demonstrate for suitable example to create Animation, Rotation in 
animation, animation clips, Humanoid avatars, Animation , Bone 
movement and animation , Using Unity development of Animations : 
This work is done using programming.  
Practical using Unity  
1. Develop a Humanoid character animation  and Game using 
Unity.  
2. View the developed game in Oculus quest by setting it up.   
 
 
 
 
4+2 
(Project)   
 
 
 
 
Apply  
 
Module -5: Augmented reality with Unity  
Augmented reality with Unity : Program to show augmented reality, 
Program to show The Relationship between Augmented Reality and 
Other Technologies - Media, Technologies, Program to show 
Spectrum between Real and Virtual  worlds, Applications  of 
augmented reality, C# Programming of pivot object in unity.  
Practical using Unity  
1. Develop augmented reality project to show animation through 
mobile with a character augmented in it.  
2. Augment a character to the video and view it using unity.    
 
 
 
4+2 
(Project)   
 
 
Apply  
 
Mini project  
 Using VR exploring the human body level by level, including cell level.  
 Using VR describing how medicine and body cures the illness.  
 Touchless ATM Using Augmented Reality.  
 Augmented Reality Controlled Hologram.  
 Augmented Reality House devices.  
 Augmented Reality Agriculture Field.  
 Augmented Reality and Medical devices.  
 VR Game Development.  
 VR Application Development.  
 Development of AI controlled VR Device, that accurately work to keep the clarity very 
good and using technology keep the eye healthy.  
 Development of Cardboard VR device as activity.  
 Improvising the quality of the VR Device and determining the accuracy.  
 Development of Satellite with the capability of VR Camera and more features.  
 Ability to view the Solar system using the VR Device using compatible camera sent 
through the satellite.  
 Upgrading the ARVR device  
 Course Outcomes:  
The students will be able to  
1. Demonstrate proficiency in handling Unity using C# in using the graphics to develop a 
model, Interface, Navigation, and scenes.  
2. Apply the working of different Real -world models, Meshes, Textures  
3. Apply the skills in developing Humanoid, and the b asic models of Augmented Reality  
Develop the real time projects to solve complex problems and see the results in visual 
effects.  
References:  
1. Virtual Reality Technology, Second Edition, Gregory C. Burdea & Philippe Coiffet, John Wiley 
& Sons.  
2. Allan Fowler -AR Game Development ‖, 1st Edition, A press Publications, 2018, ISBN 978 - 
1484236178  
3. Allan Fowler - Beginning iOS AR Game Development Developing Augmented Reality Apps 
with Unity and C#, 1st Edition, Apress Publications, 2018, ISBN 978 -1484236178  
4. Dona ld Hearn & Pauline Baker: Computer Graphics with OpenGL Version,3rd / 4th Edition, 
Pearson Education,2011  
5. https://docs.unity3d.com/2023.2/Documentation/Manual/Scr iptingSection.html  
6. Virtual Reality, Steven M. LaValle, Cambridge University Press, 2016  
7. Understanding Virtual Reality: Interface, Application and Design, William R Sherman and Alan 
B Craig, (The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics) ”. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, San Francisco, CA, 2002  
 
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VI 
Deep Learning  (PCI)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML161  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week (L: T:  P: J) 2:0:2:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to 
 Learn the various training aspects of a neural network,  
 Learn the need for convolutional neural network for visual tasks,  
 Learn the working of recurrent and convolutional neural network for sequence processing,  
 Learn approaches for natural language tasks using recurrent neural networks and attention mechanism, 
and 
 Learn the working on autoencoders to learn latent repre sentations of input data to be used for various 
tasks.  
 
 Prerequisites:  Basics of Machine Learning , Linear Algebra  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1: Deep Neural Networks Training  
The Vanishing/Exploding Gradients Problems, Reusing Pretrained Layers, 
Faster Optimizers, Learning Rate Scheduling, Avoiding Overfitting Through 
Regularization  
 
Practical:  
1. Build a neural network of appropriate depth on CIFAR10 dataset with 
He initializatio n, Swish activation function, Nadam optimizer and 
early stopping. Compare this model’s learning curve on its 
convergence, performance and training time with another model with 
batch normalization layer added.  
2. Apply transfer learning to reuse pretrained lay ers to experiment if it 
reduces training time and improves model performance with less data.  
 
 Self-study: Python code to use and com pare different optimizers, 
initialization functions and variants of the ReLU  activation function.   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Convolutional Neural Networks  
Architecture of the Visual Cortex, Convolutional Layers, Pooling Layers, 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) Architectures, Data Augmentation, 
Pretrained Models from Keras , Pretrained Models for Transfer Learning, 
Classification and Localization, Object Detection  – Sliding CNN, Fully 
Convolutional Networks, YOLO , Object Tracking, Semantic Segmentation  
 
Practical:  
1. Build CNN  from scratch on MNIST  dataset.  
2. Build an image class ifier using a pretrained Xception  model on 
TensorFlow flower dataset.  
Self-study: Building a model using pretrained ResNet and VGG Net  
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
Module -3: Sequence Processing  
Recurrent Neurons and Layers – Memory Cells, Input and Output 
Sequences; Training RNNs, Forecasting a Time -series, Handling Long 
Sequences - Unstable Gradients Problem, Short -Term Memory Problem  
 
Practical:  
1. Analyze a simple time -series dataset and perform  univariate time -
series forecasting first with a linear model and then with a simple 
RNN and compare model performance. Also experiment with deep 
RNNs to check if the model performance improves further.  
2. Consider the same dataset and perform multivariate time -series 
forecasting and compare model performance with the one from the 
previous experiment.  
 
  Self-study: Implementation of Time -LLM to forecast time series data   
 
 
6+4  
 
(CO3 ) 
Apply  
Module -4: Text Processing  
Generating Text using Character RNN; Sentiment Analysis – Masking, 
Reusing Pretrained Embeddings and Language Models; Encoder –Decoder 
Network for Neural Machine Translation - Bidirectional RNNs, Beam 
Search, Attention Mechanisms ; 
Transformers – Original transformer architecture,  Encoder -only and 
Decoder -only transformers; Model fine -tuning using SFT (supervised fine -
tuning) and RLHF (reinforcement learning with human feedback), DPO 
(Direct Preference Optimization);  
 
Practical:  
1. Consider IMDb  reviews dataset and train two models – one without 
any pretrained embeddings and other one with a contextualized 
pretrained embeddings, to classify sentiment of a movie review and 
then compare performance of these two models.  
2. Use both pipeline and pretrai ned transformer language models from 
Hugging Face Transformer library to generate text from a prompt.  
Self-study:  Bidirectional LSTM   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
(CO4)  
Apply  
Module -5: Multimodality & Representation Learning  
Vision Transformers (ViT) – Visual attention, CNN -Tranformer hybrid, 
Original and other versions of ViT; Multimodal transformers;  
 
Representation Learning –  Efficient Data Representations, Performing PCA 
with an Undercomplete Linear Autoencoder, Stacked Autoencoders, 
Convolutional Autoencoders, Denoi sing Autoencoders, Sparse 
Autoencoders, Variational Autoencoders  
 
Practical:  
1. Consider an appropriate image dataset and build denoising stacked 
autoencoder to reconstruct noisy images.  
2. Build a variational autoencoder on the appropriate image  dataset and 
use it to generate images.  
 
 Self-study:  Comparison  of different types of autoencoders and their usage in 
a specific field.   
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will  be able to 
1. Use pretrained layers, choose appropriate optimizer and learning rate, and avoid model 
overfitting  
2. Design appropriate CNN architectures, apply transfer learning, use pretrained models, and 
perform various image tasks  
3. Apply RNN and CNN in various sequence processing tasks  
4. Apply pretrained embedding  and transformer models for natural language tasks  
5. Apply autoencoders and PCA in various unsupervised machine learning tasks.  
Reference  Books:  
1. Aurélien Géron, Hands -on Machine Learning with Scikit -Learn and Pytorch , O’Reilly, 2025 
[Previous version: Aurél ien Géron. Hands -on Machine Learning with Scikit -Learn, Keras, and 
TensorFlow , Third Edition, O’Reilly, 2022]  
2. Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning , Second Edition, Springer, 2023  
3. François Chollet, Matthew Watson. Deep Learning with Python , Third Edition, 2025, Manning  
4. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning , MIT Press, 2016  
5. Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning , 2019  
 
 
 
 
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VI 
Natural Language Processing  (PCI) 
Credit: 3  
Course  Code  24AML162  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week (L: T:  P: J) 2:0:2:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to 
 Understand  Natural  Language  Processing  Concepts  and its Applications.  
 Analysis  of regular  expressions , parsing.  
 Semantic  Analysis  of meaning  representation.  
 Design  of information  retrieval models.  
 Apply NLP concepts in language model.  
Prerequisite Concepts: Automata Theory Concepts, Probability, Python Programming Language.  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  & Word Level Analysis  
Introduction:  Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Stages in natural  
language  Processing, NLP Pipeline, Origins and challenges of NLP,  Applications 
of NLP,  Introduction to the corpus . 
Word level Analysis:  Regular Expressions -Finite -State Automata -Morphological  
Parsing -Spelling Error Detection and correction. Part -of-Speech Tagging - Rule  
based  tagger, Stochastic  tagger, Hybrid Taggers, Unknown words.  
Self-Study Component : Corpus, Basic elements of corpus, Regular Expressions -
Finite -State Automata.  
Practical:  
1. a) Tokenizing  -Design  a Python  program  to splitting  up a larger  body  of 
text into smaller  lines,  words  or even  create words  for a non -English  
language.  
2. Lemmatizing  & Stemming - Design  a Python  program  to group  together  
the different            inflected  forms  of a word  so they  can be  analyzed  as a single  
item.  
3. Corpus - Design  a Python  program  to illustrate  corpus.  
4. Process -Implement  a python  program  to process  the given  text. 
5. a) Chunking - Design  a python  program  to group  similar  words  together  
based  on the  nature  of the word.  
b) Chinking - Design  a Python  program  to remove  a sequence  of tokens  
from  a chunk.  
6. POS Tagger - Design  python  program  to perform  part-of-speech  tagging  
on the text scraped  from  a website.  
7. Sentiment Analysis - Design  a Python  program  to analyze  the given   
text.  
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: N-Grams  
N-Grams:  Simple  N-grams,  Smoothing - Laplace  smoothing,  Good  Turing  
Discounting,  Backoff,  Entropy . Morphology:  Inflectional  morphology,  
Derivational  morphology.  
Self-Study Component:  Advance issues in Good Turing discounting estimation.  
Practical:  
1. N grams - Implement  a Python  program  to implement  N-Gram  
2. Smoothing -Design  a Python  program  to perform  smoothing  using  various  
methods  in Python.  
3. Good  turing - Develop  a Python  program  to calculate  good  turing  
frequency.   
 
 
6+4  
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
Module -3: Lexical  Semantics  
Semantic: Meaning Representation, Lexical Semantics -Relationships, 
Ambiguity, Word Sense Disambiguation –Selectional Restriction -based word 
sense disambiguation, context -based word sense disambiguation Approaches -
Lesk’s Algorithm, Knowledge source in WSD.  
Self-Study Component: Context -based word sense disambiguation Approaches - 
KNN algorithm & Bayesian Classification.  
Practical:  
1. Lexical  Semantics - Design  Python  program  to do text classification.  
2. Meaning  Representation - Implement  a Python  program  to represent  the 
meaning  of the given text.  
3. Disambiguity - Design  the lesk algorithm  in Python  to handle  word  
sense  disambiguation.   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
(CO3)  
Apply  
Module -4: Information  Retrieval  
Information Retrieval -Introduction, Design features of information retrieval 
systems - Indexing,  eliminating  stop words,  Stemming,  Classical  information  
retrieval  Models - Boolean  model, Probabilistic  model, Vector  space  model.  
Applications:  Information  Extraction,  Automatic  text summarization : Types of 
Summaries & Approaches , Question –Answer  System : Architecture of an Open -
Domain Question -Answering System.  
Self-Study Component: Topic Modelling.  
Practical:  
1. Information  Extraction - Design  Python  programs  to extract  structured  
information  from  unstructured information.  
2. Filtering  Stop Words - Implement  a python  program  to filtering  stop 
words.  
3. Question  Answering  System - Design  a questioning  answer  system  using  
Python.   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO4)  
Apply  
Module -5: Language Processing using Large Language Model  
Introduction to GPT; Architecture - Attention mechanism, Queries, Keys and 
Values, Causal Masking, Transformer Block, Positional Encoding; Stochastic Text 
Generation with GPT: Training GPT, Analysis of Generated Text - Temperature 
parameter, Attention score for generated words.  
Self-Study Component: Overview of other large language models for different 
NLP tasks: BERT, T5, GPT -3, GP T-4, ChatGPT.  
Practical:  
1. Casual Masking -Implement a python program to do casual masking in 
GPT.  
2. Positional Encoding -Implement a python code to do positional encoding in 
GPT.   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO5) 
Apply  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Apply  the Natural  Language  processing  concepts  to the different  applications  of Corpus  and 
perform word level analysis . 
2. Solve the  N grams  problems using smoothing techniques . 
3. Make use  of meaning  representation and  word  sense disambiguation  models.  
4. Build  NLP  models -Information  retrieval,  text summarization  and question -answering system.  
5. Apply NLP in large language model.  
Reference  Books:  
1. Siddiqui  T., Tiwary  U. S. Natural  language processing  and Information  retrieval,  OUP,  2023.  
2. Daniel Jurafsky  and James H Martin, “Speech and Language Processing:  An introduction to 
Natural  Language  Processing,  Computational  Linguistics,  and Speech Recognition”,  2nd Edition,  
Prentice  Hall,  2022.  
3. David Foster. Transformers,  Generative Deep Learning: Teaching Machines to Paint, Write, 
Compose, and Play, Second Edition, O’Reilly, 2023.  
 
 
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VI 
                      Generative  Artificial  Intelligence  (PCI)  
Credit:  4 
Course  Code  24AML 163 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week (L: T:  P: J) 3:0:2:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  50 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to 
 get an introduction to generative AI and its landscape,  
 learn generative adversarial networks as generative models,  
 learn how large language models generate text,  
 learn advanced techniques for generating text using large language models and  
 Learn  techniques for generating images using diffusion models.  
   
Prerequisites: Foundation of machine learning and deep learning  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloo
m’s 
Level  
Module -1: Introduction  
Introduction to Generative Artificial Intelligence, Prompt Engineering and 
Principles of Prompting, Evaluating Quality of Generated Response;  
Introduction to Large Language Models (LLMs) for Text Generation: Vector 
Representation, Transformer Architecture, Probabilistic Text Generation; 
Different Pretrained Text Generation Models . 
Practical:  
1. Experiment in an appropriate prompt playground (e.g. OpenAI 
Playground) over different text prompts issued in different contexts 
with respect to principles of prompts and observe respective responses.  
2. Repeat the same experiment for any appropriate image model to 
generate images in different prompt contexts.  
Self-Study: Quantization & LoRA, Model Comparison;   
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Generative Adversarial Networks  
Distinction between Autoencoder  and Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN); The Generator and Discriminator; Deep Convolutional GAN; 
Training and Evaluation of GAN; Wasserstein GAN with Gradient Penalty; 
Conditional GAN; Progressive Growing of GAN;  
Adversarial Machine Learning : Introduction, adversarial examples, common 
Attack Types  - poisoning attacks, evasion attacks, extraction ; Defenses.  
Practical:  
1. Implement a Conditional GAN model that learns to generate  
 
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
handwritten digits of choice.  
2. Implement a DCGAN to generate realistic looking images in an 
appropriate domain.  
Self-study: StyleGAN  
Module -3: Text Generation using Generative Pretrained LLMs  
Text Generation using OpenAI  GPT: Generating List, Responses in 
Different Data Format, Language Translation, Context for Reasoning, Text 
Style Unbundling for Textual Features, Summarization, Chunking, 
Sentiment Analysis, Chain of Prompts (Least to Most), Role Prompting, 
Avoiding Hall ucinations, Strategies for Classification with LLMs  
 
Practical:  
1. Use an LLM to generate content in diverse formats (e.g. plaintext, 
JSON, YAML, mermaid, etc.) and extract information using 
appropriate methods.  
2. Apply chain -of-prompts (least -to-most) technique for sequential 
generation and extraction of increasingly detailed knowledge from a 
LLM on a given topic.  
3. Build a text summarization and sentiment analysis tool powered by 
an LLM . 
 
Self-Study: Criteria Evaluation, Meta Prompting   
 
 
6+4  
 
(CO3)  
Apply  
Module -4: Advanced Techniques for Text Generation  
Text Generation with LangChain  Framework: Chat Models, Prompt 
Templates, Expression Language, Output Parsers, Response Evaluation, 
Function Calling, Extracting Data, Query Planning, Few -shot Prompt 
Templates, Data Connection, Text Splitters, Task Decomposition, Prompt 
Chaining  
Text Generation with Embeddings & Vector Databases: Retrieval 
Augmented Generation (RAG) Pattern s (Baseline RAG and GraphRAG) , 
Embeddings, Document Loading, Storing and Querying Vector from a 
Vector Database  (such as Pinecone, FAISS) , RAG with LangChain, S elf-
querying;  
Practical:  
1. Create an LLM application for an appropriate task using LangChain 
framework and RAG pattern.  
2. Develop a program using LangChain that enables uploading and 
processing multiple document formats, including PDF, CSV, and 
DOCX files.  
3. Develop a program that demonstrates   
i. function calling with tool usage in Large Language Models   
 
 
 
6+4  
 
 
(CO4)  
Apply  
ii. Function calling using LangChain  
Self-Study: Fine -tuning LLMs with reinforcement learning from human 
feedback (RLHF)  
Module -5: Representation Learning  using Autoencoders  
Introduction to Diffusion Models for Image Generation: OpenAI DALL -E, 
Midjourney, Stable Diffusion, Google Gemini;  
Standard practices for image generation - Format and art style modifiers, 
Reverse engineering prompts, Quality boosters, Negative prompts, 
Weighted terms, Prompting with an image  
Safety in LLMs:  Introduction to risks associated with LLMs – 
Hallucinations, memorization, disinformation, harmful content, privacy; 
Risk mitigation with RLHF and RAG;  
Practical:  
1. Develop a Python program to demonstrate the forward diffusion 
process for progressively converting an image into noise.  
2. Develop a Python program to demonstrate the reverse diffusion 
process for reconstructing an image from noise.  
3. Experiment to gene rate images using StableDiffusion  over all relevant 
standard prompting practices and observ e the relevant changes in 
model output.   
Self-Study: In and outpainting, Prompt rewriting, Prompt analysis   
 
 
6+4  
 
 
 
(CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will  be able to 
1. experiment with a prompt playground to generate both text and images applying principles of 
prompts,  
2. build and apply GAN models to generate images,  
3. apply large language models for text generation against different NLP task requirements,  
4. build an LLM application LangChain framework and RAG pattern  
5. Apply  standard techniques to maximize the output and formats from diffusion models towards 
image generation.  
Textbooks:  
1. James Phoenix and Mike Taylor. Prompt Engineering for Generative AI , O'Reilly, 2024 [3, 4, 5]  
2. Jakub Langr, Vladimir Bok. GANs in Action , Manning, 2019 [2] 
 
Reference  Books:  
1. David Foster. Generative Deep Learning , Second Edition, O’Reilly, 2023  
2. Denis Rothman. Transformers for Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision: Explore 
Generative AI and Large Language Models with Hugging Face, ChatGPT, GPT -4V, and DALL -
E3, 3rd Edition, Packt Publications, 2024 [4, 5]  
3. Tanmoy Chakraborty. Introduction to Large Language Models Generative AI for Text , 2024, 
Wiley  
4. Joseph Babcock and Raghav Bali. Generative AI with Python and TensorFlow 2: Create 
Images, Text, and Music with VAEs, GANs, LSTMs, Transformer Models , Packt, 2021  
5. Zhihan Lyu. Applications of Generative AI , Springer, 2024  
 
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VI 
Image  Processing  and Computer  Vision  (PBL)  
Credit:  2 
Course  Code  24AML164  CIA Marks   50 
Teaching  Hours/Week (L: T: P:  J) 0:0:2:2  SEA  Marks   50 
Total  Number  of Contact  Hours  50 Exam  Hours   03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to: 
 Understand  the fundamentals  of image  processing  
 Understand  the image  transform,  restoration  techniques  and methods  used in digital  image  processing  
 Understand  the image  enhancement  techniques,  Morphological  Operations  and Segmentation  used in digital 
image processing  
 Understand  the various  techniques  used in computer  vision  
 Understand  the image  data compression  and motion  analysis  of computer  vision  
 
Prerequisites:  C Programming, Python Programming   
Tool using:  MATLAB R2024  
 
Task 1  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Digital Image Fundamentals : Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, components 
of an image processing system, image sensing and acquisition, image sampling and 
quantization, spatial and intensity resolution, image representation, resolution scaling, 
RAW image concepts, and basics  of imaging pipeline.  
Practical  using  MATLAB  
1. Write a program to read various formats of digital images and apply image 
sampling and quantization techniques. (Using Inbuilt Functions)   
2. Write a program to read a digital image and split and display the image 
into four quadrants (top, bottom, left, right). (Without Using Inbuilt 
Functions)  
Self-Study component: Study real -time imaging systems and different image file 
formats.   
 
 
 
 
2  
 
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Task 2  
Spatial Domain Processing:  
Intensity transformation techniques, contrast enhancement, histogram processing , 
spatial filtering, image sharpening, adaptive histogram equalization, and edge -
preserving filtering.  
Practical  using  MATLAB  
1. Write a program to perform rotation, scaling, and translation of an image. 
(Using Inbuilt Functions)   
2. Write a program for histogram computation and histogram equalization. 
(Without Using Inbuilt Functions)   
3. Write a program to extract edges and textures usi ng filtering techniques. 
(Using Inbuilt Functions)  
Self-Study component: Analyze the effect of different filters (smoothing and 
sharpening) on image quality using sample images.   
 
 
2  
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Task 3  
Image Restoration and Reconstruction:  
Image degradation models, noise types, spatial and frequency domain filtering, 
restoration techniques, Wiener filtering, and blind deconvolution.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to add noise and remove noise from an image. (Using 
Inbuilt Functions)   
2. Write a program for image restoration using mean/median filtering. 
(Without Using Inbuilt Functions)   
Self-Study component: Compare the performance of different noise removal 
techniques on noisy images.   
 
 
 
2  
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
 
 
 
Task 4  
Color Image Processing:  
Color fundamentals, color models (RGB, CMY, CMYK, HSV, HSI) , color  
transformations, color constancy, and color -based analysis . 
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to analyze images in different color models. (Using Inbuilt 
Functions)   
2. Write a program to convert RGB image to grayscale and separate color 
channels. (Without Using Inbuilt Functions)  
Self-Study component: Observe how different color spaces affect image visualization and 
object detection.   
 
2  
 
(CO2)  
Apply  
Task 5  
Morphological Image Processing:  
Erosion, dilation, opening, closing, structuring elements, shape analysis, and 
skeletonization.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to perform morphological operations on an image. (Using 
Inbuilt Functions)   
2. Write a progr am to implement erosion and dilation using structuring 
elements. (Without Using Inbuilt Functions)   
Self-Study component: Explore applications of morphological operations in object 
detection and noise removal.   
 
2 (CO3)  
Apply  
Task 6  
Image Segmentation:  
Edge detection, thresholding , region -based segmentation, clustering -based segmentation 
(K-means), watershed segmentation, and introduction to CNN -based semantic 
segmentation concepts.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to segment objects using watershe d transformation. (Using Inbuilt 
Functions)  
2. Write a program to perform region -based image segmentation using region 
growing method. (Without Using Inbuilt Functions)  
Self-Study component: Compare segmentation results obtained using different 
techniques on the same image.  2 (CO3)  
Apply  
Task 7    
Introduction to Computer Vision:  
Introduction to Computer Vision:  2 (CO4)  
Apply  
Image representation and image formation models, feature extraction and feature 
matching techniques, image analysis and object recognition tasks, camera models, 
feature descriptors (SIFT, SURF, ORB), object detection concepts, motion analysis 
fundamentals, and introduction to CNN -based computer vision techniques.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to detect and match image features using SURF/ORB descriptors 
for object recognition. (Using Inbuilt Functions)  
2. Write a program to extract basic image features using pixel intensity values and 
simple distance matching techniques. (Without Using Inbuilt Functions ) 
Self-Study component: Explore real-world applications of computer vision such 
as face recognition and object detection.  
Task 8    
3D Vision Geometry:  
3D image formation, projective geometry, coordinate transformations, depth 
perception, and stereo vision concepts.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a basic depth estimation or stereo matching program using MATLAB/Python 
libraries. (Using Inbuilt Functions)  
2. Write a program for face detection in an image. (Without Using Inbuilt 
Functions )  
Self-Study Component:  
Study how depth perception is achieved in stereo imaging systems.  2 (CO4)  
Apply  
Task 9    
Motion Analysis:  
Motion detection, frame differencing, temporal changes in images, background 
subtraction, and tracking basics.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to detect motion between two images. (Using Inbuilt 
Functions)   
2. Write a program to implement frame differencing between two images. 
(Without Using Inbuilt Functions)   
Self-Study Component:  
Analyze how motion detection is used in surveillance and tracking systems.  2 (CO5)  
Apply  
Task 10    
Optical Flow:  
Optical flow estimation, motion representation, Lucas -Kanade method, and 
analysis of motion between image frames.  
Practical using MATLAB  
1. Write a program to estimate optical flow between two images using inbuilt 
functions. (Using Inbuilt Functio wns)  
2. Write a program to estimate motion between two images using pixel 
intensity differences. (Without Using Inbuilt Functions)   
Self-Study Componen t: 
Explore applications of optical flow in video analysis and motion tracking.  2  (CO4)  
Apply  
Projects : Develop real world application using MATLAB graphical user interface or Python   
 
1. Automated Real -Time Detection of Potentially Suspicious Behavior in Public Transport Areas  
2. Brain Tumor Segmentation Based on Local Independent Projection -Based Classification  
3. Emotional stress recognition system using EEG and psychophysiological signals  
4. Image Contrast Enhancement Using Color and Depth Histograms      
 
(CO5)  
Create  
5. Medical image classification using PSO Optimization techniques  
6. Fast and Accurate Detection and Classification of Plant Diseases  
7. A High -Performance Fingerprint Matching System for Large Databases Based on GPU  
8. Fruit classification using computer vision and feedforwa rd neural network  
9. Real Time Finger Print Segmentation Based on Local Independent Projection -Based 
Classification  
10. A therapy System for Articulation Disorder correction  
11. Evaluation of Color Spatio -Temporal Interest Points for Human Action Recognition  
12. Visual V oice Activity Detection as A Help for Speech Source  Separation from Convolutive 
Mixtures  
13. Identification of human facial expression signal classification using Spatio Temporal Algorithm  
14. Employee Attendance Monitoring using SURF Algorithms  
15. Lung Cancer Detect ion in Chest X - Ray Image  
16. Brain Cancer Detection using Machine Learning  
17. Smart Digital Monitoring of Student’s Attendance system using PCA  
18. Development of Smart Voting system using Face and Finger data fusion analysi s 
19. Detect and recognize the Apple disease detection using machine learning models  
20. Detection melanoma skin cancer detection using machine learning models  
 
Course  Outcomes:  At the end of the course  students  should  be able to: 
1. Understand,  Ascertain  and Apply  the basics  of image  processing  concepts  through  mathematical 
interpretation.  
2. Apply  image  processing  techniques  in both the spatial  and frequency  (Fourier)  domains.  
3. Demonstrate and Apply image enhancement techniques, Morphological Operations and Segmentation used in 
digital image processing.  
4. Conduct  independent  study  and analysis  of Image  Enhancement  techniques.  
5. Apply  computer  vision  techniques  in image  data compression  and motion  analysis  of computer  vision  
 
Reference  Books:  
1. Rafael  C. Gonzalez  and Richard  E. Woods,  Digital  Image  Processing,  Third  Ed., Prentice  Hall,  2008.  
2. Sonka,  Hlavac,  Boyle,  Digital  Image  Processing  and Computer  Vision,  India  Edition,  
3. Digital  Image  Processing - S.Jayaraman,  S.Esakkirajan,  T.Veerakumar,  TataMcGraw  Hill 2014.  
4. Fundamentals  of Digital  Image  Processing -A. K. Jain, Pearson  2004.  
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  
Learning  
SEMESTER – VI 
Recommender Systems  (Professional  Elective I)  
                                                  Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML165 11 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  
Hours/Week  (L: 
T: P: J) 3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of 
Lecture Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students to  
 To introduce the concept of recommender systems  
 To be aware of various issues related to Personalization and Recommendations.  
 To be aware of design space, trade -offs and its application in various domain  
 To review basic approaches to building recommendations . 
Prerequisites:  
  Machine learning & Advanced Machine Learning concepts  
 Number  of 
Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1 
An Introduction to Recommender System:  
Introduction, Goals of Recommender Systems, Basic 
Models of Recommender Systems, Domain -Specific 
Challenges in Recommender Systems, Advanced Topics 
and Applications . 
Self-study  component:  
  Pick a domain (e.g., healthcare, e -commerce) and list 3    
  unique RS challenges it faces.  
RB1: Ch 1  
 
8 
Understand  
(CO1)  
Module -2 
Neighborhood -Based Collaborative Filtering : 
Introduction, Key Properties of Ratings Matrices, 
Predicting Ratings with Neighborhood -Based Methods, 
Clustering and Neighborhood -Based Methods , 
Dimensionality Reduction and Neighborhood Methods, A 
Regression Mod eling View of Neighborhood Methods, 
Graph Models for Neighborhood -Based Methods  
Self-study component:  
  Given a dataset, try at least two neighborhood -based  
  methods (e.g., item -based + graph model), evaluate and   
8 
 
Analyze  
(CO2)  
  compare.  
RB1: Ch 2 
Module -3 
 Model -Based Collaborative Filtering:  
Introduction, Decision and Regression Trees, Rule -Based 
Collaborative Filtering, Naive Bayes Collaborative Filtering, 
Latent  Factor Models  
 Self-study component:  
 Build and compare at least two model -based approaches 
(e.g., Naive Bayes vs. Matrix Factorization) on the same 
dataset.  
RB1: Ch 3  
8 
Analyze  
(CO2, CO3)  
Module -4 
Content -Based Recommender Systems :  
Introduction, Basic Components of Content -Based Systems, 
Preprocessing and Feature Extraction, Learning User Profiles 
and Filtering, Content -Based Versus Collaborative 
Recommendations, Using Content -Based Models for 
Collaborative Filtering  
Self-study component:  
 Identify 3 platforms using content -based recommendations 
(e.g., Goodreads, Spotify) and describe what features they 
may use. How does Netflix or Spotify combine approaches 
in real -world systems?  
RB 1: Ch 4  
8 
Analyze  
(CO2 ) 
Module -5 
Knowledge -Based Recommender Systems  
Introduction, Constraint -Based Recommender Systems , 
Case -based R ecommender Systems  
Evaluating Recommender Systems  
Introduction, Evaluation Paradigms, General Goals of 
Evaluation Design, Design Issues in Offline Recommender 
Evaluation, Accuracy Metrics in Offline Evaluation, 
Limitations of Evaluation Measures  
Self-study component:  
Design 3 logical constraints for a travel recommender 
system. Create a slide deck comparing evaluation strategies 
with real -world examples (e.g., Netflix, Spotify, Amazon).  
RB 2: Ch. 5.1,5.2,5,3 ,7  
8 
Analyze 
(CO2, CO4 ) 
Course  outcomes:  
The students will be able to 
1. Understand the basic concepts of recommender systems  
2. Solve mathematical optimization problems pertaining  to recommender systems  
3. Analyze the different approaches towards recommendation  
4. Carry out performance evaluation of recommender systems based on various metrics  
 
Reference  Books:  
1. Charu C. Aggarwal, Recommender Systems: The Textbook, Springer, 2016 . 
2. Dietmar Jannach , Markus Zanker , Alexander Felfernig  and Gerhard Friedrich , 
Recommender Systems: An Introduction, Cambridge University Press (2011), 1st ed.  
3. Francesco Ricci , Lior Rokach , Bracha Shapira , Recommender Sytems Handbook, 3rd  
edition,  Springer (20 22) 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VI  
Cryptography (Professional Elective –I) 
Credit: 3  
Course  Code  24AML16541  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  3:0:0:0  SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  40 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Enable to learn the fundamental concepts of network security, cryptography,  and utilize these 
techniques in computing systems.  
 Discuss about various encryption techniques.  
 Understand the concept of public key Cryptography.  
 Introduce and demonstrate message authentication, hash function, wireless security and internet 
security pro tocols.  
Prerequisites:  
 Knowledge of  computer networks, operating systems, programming, and basic mathematics is essential 
to understand how data flows, how systems can be secured.  
Module 1:  BACKGROUND  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’
s Level  
Computer, Network Security  and Cryptography concepts: Computer  Security 
Concepts The OSI Security Architecture, Security Attacks, Security Services,  Security 
Mechanisms, Fundamental Security Design Principles , Attack Surfaces and Attack 
Trees . Classical Ciphers: Introduct ion to cryptography, cryptanalysis, and cryptology, 
Overview of cryptography . A Model for Network Security, Standards.  
Self Study : Transposition Methods   
 
08 
  
(CO1) 
Apply  
 
Module 2:  SYMMETRIC CIPHERS   
SYMMETRIC CIPHERS Advanced Encryption Standard: Finite Field Arithmetic, 
AES Structure, AES Transformation Functions ,AES Key Expansion , An AES 
Example, AES Implementation, Block Cipher Operation : Multiple Encryption and 
Triple DES , Electronic Codebook ,Stream Ciphers.  Cipher Block Chaining Format -
Preserving Encryption  
Self Study : Advanced symmetric encryption techniques   
 
08 
 
 
 (CO2) 
Apply  
 
Module 3:  ASYMMETRIC CIPHERS   
Public -Key Cryptography and RSA : Principles of Public -Key Cryptosystems : The 
RSA Algorithm Other Public -Key Cryptosystems : Diffie -Hellman Key  
 
 
08 
  
 
(CO3)
Apply  
 
 
 Exchange ,Elgamal Cryptographic System ,Elliptic Curve, Elliptic Curve Cryptography,  
Pseudorandom Number Generation Based on an Asymmetric Cipher  
Self Study : Public -key cryptography fundamentals    
Module 4:  CRYPTOGRAPHIC DATA INTEGRITY ALGORITHMS   
Cryptographic Hash Functions : Applications of Cryptographic Hash Functions ,Two 
Simple Hash Functions, Requirements and Security ,Hash Functions Based on Cipher 
Block Chaining ,Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) , SHA -3 .Message Authentication 
Codes  :Message Authentication Requirements message Authentication Functions, 
Requirements for Message Authentication Codes , Digital Signatures : Digital 
Signatures . Elgamal Digital Signature Scheme ,  Elliptic Curve Digital Signature 
Algorithm.  
Self Study : Digital signature algorithms including SHA variants.  08 (CO4)  
Apply  
 
Module 5:  NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY   
Cloud Computing, Cloud Security Risks and Countermeasures, Data Protection in the 
Cloud, Cloud Security as a Service Addressing Cloud Computing Security Concerns  
Wireless Network Security: Wireless Security, Mobile Device Security,  
Electronic Mail Security: Email Threats and Comprehensive Email Security, S/MIME  
IP Security  :IP Security Overview, IP Security Policy , Internet Key Exchange  
Self Study : IP security mechanisms.  08 
 (CO5)  
Apply  
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Identify the cryptographic solutions for the problems.  
2. Classify and apply the symmetric encryption techniques to solve the problems.  
3. Apply and illustrate various public key cryptographic techniques to solve the problems.  
4. Evalu ate the authentication and hash algorithms.  
5. Apply wireless security and internet security protocols.  
Reference Books  
1. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 8th Edition, Pearson Education by William 
Stallings  
2. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 7th Edition, Pearson Education by William 
Stallings  
3. Cryptography and Network Security, Behrouz A.  Foruzan, 3rd edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007  
4. Cyber Defense Mechanisms: Security, Privacy, and Challenges (Artificial Intell igence (AI): Elementary 
to Advanced Practices) by Gautam Kumar (Editor), Dinesh Kumar Saini,  Nguyen Ha Huy Cuong, 1st 
edition, CRC Press, 2020.  
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VI 
 Data Warehousing  & Data Mining  (Professional Elective I)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML165 51 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
1. Define multi -dimensional data models.  
2. Explain rules related to association, classification and clustering analysis.  
3. Compare and contrast between different classification and clustering algorithms  
Prerequisite: DBMS, working with datasets  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts and Modeling  
Basic Concepts:  Introduction, A multitier Architecture, Data warehouse 
models: Enterprise warehouse, Data mart and virtual warehouse, Extraction, 
Transformation and loading, Metadata Repository.  
Data Cube:  A multidimensional data model, Stars, Snowflakes and Fact 
constellations: Schemas for multidimensional Data models, Dimensions: 
The role of concept Hierarchies, Measures: Their Categorization and 
computation, Typical OLAP Operations, Starnet Query Model f or Querying 
multidimensional databases.  
Self-Study:  Explore Data warehousing tools  8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2 Data Warehouse: Design, Usage  & Implementation  
Design, Usage:  A Business Analysis Framework for data warehouse design, 
Data Warehouse design process, data warehouse usage for Information 
processing, Online analytics processing to Multidimensional Data Mining.  
Implementation: Efficient Data cube Computation: An Overv iew, Indexing 
OLAP Data: Bitmap Index and Join Index, Efficient Processing of OLAP 
Queries, OLAP server architectures: ROLAP versus MOLAP versus 
HOLAP. Comprehensive Concepts of a Data Lake  
Self-Study: W orking of a Data Lake Lambda Architecture  8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -3 Data Mining: Introduction & Association Analysis  
Introduction:  What is data mining, Challenges, Data Mining Tasks, Data: 
Types of Data, Data Quality, Data Preprocessing, Measures of Similarity 
and Dissimilarity.   
8    
  (CO2)  
Apply  
Association Analysis: Problem definition, Frequent Itemset Generation, 
Rule Generation, Compact Representation of Frequent Itemsets, Alternative 
methods for generating frequent itemsets, FP -Growth a lgorithm  
Self-Study:  Sequential Patterns  
Module -4 Clustering  
Prototype - Based Clustering:  Fuzzy Clustering, Clustering  using  mixture 
models, Self -Organizing Maps (SOM)  
Density -based clustering:  Grid-based, subspace, DENCLUE  
Self-Study: Agglomerative Hierarchical clustering  8 (CO3)  
Apply  
Module -5 Clustering -II 
Graph - Based Clustering:  Sparsification, Minimum Spanning tree 
clustering, OPOSSUM: Optimal partitioning of Sparse similarities using 
METIS, Chameleon : Hierarchical clustering with dynamic modeling, shared 
nearest neighbor similarity, The Jarvis -Patrick clustering algorithm, SNN 
Density, SNN -Density Based clustering,  
Scalable Clustering algorithms:  General Issues and approaches, BIRCH, 
CURE.  
Self-Study : Anomaly Detection based on proximity  8 (CO3)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
1. Identify data mining problems and implement the data warehouse  
2. Write association rules for a given data pattern.  
3. Choose between classification and clustering solutions . 
Reference Books : 
1. Pang -Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, Vipin Kumar: Introduction to Data Mining, Pearson, First 
impression , 2014 . 
2. Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, Jian Pei: Data Mining -Concepts and Techniques, 3rd Edition, 
Morgan Kaufmann Publisher, 2012.  
3. Sam Ana hory, Dennis Murray: Data Warehousing in the Real World, Pearson,  Tenth Impression,  
2012.  
4. Michael. J. Berry, Gordon.S. Linoff: Mastering Data Mining , Wiley Edition, second edtion, 2012.  
5. Tomcy John, Pankaj Misra : Data Lake for Enterprise, 2017 Packt  Publishing.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER –VI 
Responsible AI  (Professional Elective -II - MOOC )  
Credit: 3 
Course  Code  24AML16612  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week(L:T:P:J)  3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of  Lecture Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
1. Responsible AI and Ethics  
2. Ethics and Social implications of AI . 
3. Principles of Responsible AI and machine learning  
4. Global AI governance framework and standards of OECD  
5. Legal and regulatory landscape for AI, covering laws related to non -discrimination,  data protection and 
intellectual property  
Prerequisites: Basics of AI and ML  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1: Introduction to Responsible AI and its Principles , Fundamentals of AI  
Responsible AI, Principles, AI Framework, Bias  in AI, RAI Policies and 
Governance, Creating and Evaluating AI models, Identify  Ethical issues, Issue 
spotting and mitigation, monitoring and optimizing AI model  
 
Types of AI Systems: Narrow vs. General AI, Machine Learning Basics and 
Training Methods, Deep Learning, Generative AI, and Transformer Models, 
Natural Language Processing and Multi -modal Models, Socio -technical AI 
Systems and Cross -disciplinary Collaboration, The History and Evolution of AI 
and Data Science  
 8 (CO1)   
Apply  
 
Module -2 Understand AI impact on society, RAI principles  trustworthy AI  
Individual Harms: Civil Rights, Safety, and Economic Impact, Group Harms: 
Discrimination and Bias in AI Systems, Societal Harms: Democracy, Education, 
and Public Trust, Organizational Risks: Reputational, Cultural, and Economic 
Threats , Environmental and E cosystem Impacts of AI, Redistribution of Jobs and 
Economic Opportunities Due to AI, AI's Impact on Workforce and Educational 
Access  
 
Core Principles of Responsible AI, Human -centric AI Systems, Transparency, 
Explainability, and Accountability in AI, Safe, Secure, and Resilient AI Systems, 8 (CO2)   
Apply  
 
Privacy -Enhanced AI Systems and Data Protection, OECD and EU Standards for 
Trustworthy AI, Comparis on of Global Ethical Guidelines for AI  
Module -3: AI laws and regulatory compliance, AI Legal Framework , GDRP Requirements   
Section Introduction,  AI-Specific Laws and Regulations,  Non-Discrimination 
Laws and AI Applications,  Product Safety Laws for AI Systems, Privacy and 
Data Protection in AI Systems, Intellectual Property and AI: Legal 
Considerations, Key Components of the EU Digital Services Act , the 
Intersection of AI and GDPR Requirements  
Comparison of Global Ethical Gui delines for AI, Requirements for High -Risk AI 
Systems and Foundation Models, Notification and Enforcement Mechanisms 
under the EU AI Act, Canada's Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (Bill C -27), 
Key Components of U.S. AI -related State Laws, China's Draft  Regulations on 
Generative AI, Harmonizing Global AI Laws and Risk Management 
Frameworks  
 8 (CO3)   
Apply  
 
Module -4: AI Development Life Cycle  and Testing  
Section introduction, Determining AI governance structure and responsibilities, 
Data strategies, model selection, Ethical design in AI system and Architecture, 
Understanding the Governance Challenges in AI Planning, Cross -functional 
Team Collaboration in A I Planning  
Feature engineering in AI model, Model Training and best practices, Testing and 
Validation process AI Models, Testing AI Models with Edge Cases and 
Adversarial Inputs, Privacy -preserving Machine Learning Techniques, 
Repeatability Assessments and  Model Fact Sheets, conducting Algorithm Impact 
Assessments  
 8 (CO4)   
Apply  
 
Module -5: Implementation of AI Governance, AI Project Management and  Risk Management  
Section Introduction, Creating AI Risk Management Frameworks, AI 
Governance Infrastructure: Key Roles and Responsibilities, Cross -functional 
Collaboration in AI Governance, AI Regulatory Requirements and Compliance 
Procedures, Establishing a Responsible AI Culture within Organizations, 
Assessing AI Maturity Levels in Business Functions, Managing Third -Party 
Risks in AI Systems  
 
Scoping AI Projects: Identifying Key Objectives, Mapping AI Risks: Identifying 
Internal and External Threats, Developing Risk Mitigation Strategies for AI 
Projects, Constructing a Harms Matrix for AI Risk Assessment, Conducting 
Algorithm Impact Assessments, Engaging Stakeholders in AI Risk Management, 
Data Provenance, Lineage, and Accuracy in AI Systems  8  
(CO5)   
Apply  
 
Course  Outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Understand Responsible AI ,its Principles and AI Life cycle  
2. Apply fundamentals of AI and its impact into society  
3. Apply AI laws, regulatory compliance, AI Legal Framework,  
4. Apply AI Governance and Risk Management  
5. Apply OECD standards in the AI product life  cycle   
Reference  Link : 
        https://lms.simplilearn.com/courses/6752/Introduction -to-Responsible -AI/syllabus  
https://www.simplilearn.com/free -google -cloud -responsible -ai-course -skillup?tag=ethical%20AI  
https://www.udemy.com/course/ai -governance -professional -aigp-certification -ai-
mastery/?couponCode=JUST4U02223  
 
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER –VI 
Cyber Security and Privacy (Professional Elective -II - MOOC ) 
  Credit:3  
Course Code  24AML16642  CIA Marks  50  
Teaching Hours/Week(L:T:P:J)  3:0:0:0  SEA Marks  50  
Total Number of  Lecture Hours  40 Exam Hours  03  
Course Learning Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Understand fundamentals of Cyber security.  
 Explain security Architecture and security techniques  
 Illustrate risk management issues and solutions.  
 Explain data privacy and protection.  
Prerequisites: Cryptography fundamentals  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module -1: Introduction to Cyber Security  
Introduction: Fundamentals of Security, Threat actors, physical Security, Social 
Engineering, Malware.  8   (CO1) 
Apply  
Module -2: Risk Management  
Cryptographic solutions , Risk management, Third party vendor risk management, 
Governance and Compliance. Asset and change management,  Cyber Resilience and 
Redundancy  
 8  
(CO2) 
Apply  
 
Module -3: Architecture  
 Security Architecture, Security Infrastructure, identity and access management (IAM)  
 Solution, Vulnerabilities and attacks, Malicious Activity.  8  
(CO3) 
Apply  
  
Module -4: Security Techniques  
 Hardening, Security Techniques, Vulnerability Management, Alerting and Monitoring,  
 Incident Response, Investing an Incident, Automation and orchestration, Security  
 Awareness.  8  
(CO4) 
Apply  
  
Module -5: Data Privacy and Protection  
 Data privacy - Data Protection, Complete GDPR, GDPR Certification, privacy, 
Hands on Programs.  8  
(CO5)  
Apply  
 
Course Outcomes:  
The students will be able to  
1. Understand the Fundamental Cyber Security Concept.  
2. Apply security risk management strategies.  
3. Identify different types of attack, vulnerability issues and Malicious Activity . 
4. Apply different security techniques to address security issues.  
5. Make use of GDPR for data Privacy and Protection.  
Reference Books:  
 
1. Udemy course: 
https://www.udemy.com/share/101Wj83@I57HMbLebSbmoRf1WCIXshoCztsg0Vo2PMWANE92o
McvsCK9YVpf -YTnK604c1JQ/  
2. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 7th Edition, Pearson Education by 
William Stallings  
3. Cryptography and Network Security, Behrouz A.Foruzan, 3rd edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007  
4. Cyber Defense Mechanisms: Security, Privacy, and Challenges (Artificial Intelligence (AI) : 
Elementary to Advanced Practices) by Gautam Kumar (Editor), Dinesh Kumar Saini,  Nguyen Ha Huy 
Cuong, 1st edition, CRC Press, 2020  
 
  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VI 
 Data Science  & Data Analytics (Professional Elective II  - MOOC ) 
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML16652  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  3:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Introduce the concepts of python programming, SQL and HTML.  
 Identify different cloud platforms and their characteristics for data specific core computations.  
 Identify the concepts of data warehousing and big data.  
 Determine the concepts of Power Business Intelligence.  
 Design queries for analysis of data.  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 
Introduction to Data Science - Introduction, Definition, Data Science in various 
fields, Impact of Data Science, Data Analytics Life Cycle, Data Science Toolkit, 
Data Scientist, Introduction, Types of Data, Classification of digital Data, Sources 
of Data  
SQL : Database and RDBMS, NoSQL,  RDBMS Advanced Queries, Functions, 
Aggregate and Analytical, Data Integrity, Subqueries & Views, SQL Advanced 
Concepts  
Python: Introduction to python, python variables and syntax, conditions, python 
strings, tuples, functions in python, Matplotlib and sea born for data visualization, 
Data visualization: plots, histograms, heatmap, Data preprocessing: missing values, 
outliers, encoding, Scaling and normalization, multivariate analysis, packages and 
python connectivity  
XML, Javascript and Webservices: What i s XML, XML basic tags and XML 
examples, What is Javascript and why Javascript Requires and Javascript example, 
Introduction to Webservices, What is Client and server technologies, HTTP 
Protocols and various methods of HTPP?  8 Apply  
Module -2 
Data specific core: AWS Data Services: Identity Access Management - IAM, 
Elastic Cloud Compute - EC2, AWS RDS, AWS Glue, AWS Redshift, AWS EMR, 
AWS - Dynamo DB, AWS QuickSight, AWS SageMaker  
GCP Data Services : Compute Engine, Cloud Storage, Cloud SQL, Spanner, 
Datastore, Bigtable, BigQuery, Data Proc, DataFlow, Cloud Composer, Dataprep, 
Data Fusion, Cloud AutoML, Looker  8 Apply  
Azure Data Services: introduction to Azure storage, benefits of Azure storage, 
Blob storage, Azure files, Azure container storage , type s of storage accounts, 
encryption , Azure HDInsight , What is HDInsight and the Hadoop technology 
stack?, Cluster types in HDInsight, Programming languages in HDInsight, Azure 
Cosmos DB - Database for the AI Era, Simplified application development  
Module -3 
Data Specific - DWH, DI/BI Concepts: Introduction to NoSQL, Key Features of 
NoSQL, advantages and disadvantages of NoSQL, Types of NoSQL database, 
Databricks architecture overview, High -level architecture, Serverless compute 
plane, Classic comput e plane  
Big Data Hadoop and Spark: History and timeline of big data, RDDs vs 
DataFrames and Datasets, When to use them and why, Benefits of Dataset APIs, 
Understanding Hadoop Architecture, Components, and How It Works, Functional 
Programming.  8 Apply  
Module -4 
Power BI: What is PowerBI, the parts of Power BI, How Power BI matches the role 
in a team or project, The flow of work in Power BI, How Microsoft Fabric works 
with Power BI, Paginated reports in the Power BI service, On -premises reporting 
with Po wer BI Report Server, powerBI visuals, Preattentive Attributes in 
Visualization  8 Apply  
Module -5 
Snowflake: Getting started with snowflake, key concepts and architecture, 
supporting cloud platforms, supported cloud regions, snowflake editions, snowflake 
releases, overview of key features, overview of data life cycle, continuous data 
protection, snowflake ecosystem, snowflake partner connect, general configuration, 
snowflake architecture, snowflake virtual warehouse overview, snowflake features, 
Analysis o f real time applications through snowflake.  8 Analyze  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be able to:  
 Apply the core concepts of SQL, Python and XML to perform analytics on data. (Apply)  
 Develop a comparison study of various cloud platforms and study their services and database. 
(Apply)  
 Apply the concept of Data warehousing, business intelligence and big data to analyze datasets. 
(Apply)  
 Design and develop power business intelligence and visualization for data analytics through 
snowflake platform. (App ly) 
 Analyze datasets with appropriate programming language, SQL and snowflake queries. (Analyze)  
 
References:  
 
Sl No  Modules  Recommended Links for reference  
1 
Data Specific - 
SQL Deep -dive  https://www.slideshare.net/search?searchfrom=header&q=SQL  
2 https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql -reference -commands  
3 https://comparecloud.in/  
4 Data Specific - 
DWH, DI/BI 
Concepts  https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction -to-nosql/  
5 https://docs.databricks.com/en/getting -started/overview.html  
6 https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql -reference -commands  
7 
Data Specific - 
Big Data Hadoop 
+ Spark  https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/feature/A -history -and-timeline -of-big-data 
8 https://www.databricks.com/blog/2016/07/14/a -tale-of-three -apache -spark -apis-rdds-
dataframes -and-datasets.html  
9 https://medium.com/@chenglong.w1/demystifying -yarn-understanding -its-
architecture -components -and-how-it-works -738dd95 ad453  
10 https://github.com/readme/guides/functional -programming -basics  
11 AWS Data 
Services  https://aws.amazon.com/quickstart/  
12 https://aws.amazon.com/about -aws/global -infrastructure/?p=ngi&loc=0  
13 
Azure Data 
Services  https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/storage/common/storage -introduction  
14 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/training/paths/azure -sql-fundamentals/  
15 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/data -factory/quickstart -get-started  
16 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight -overview  
17 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/synapse -analytics/overview -what -is 
18 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/fabric/get -started/microsoft -fabric -overview  
19 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/azure/cosmos -db/introduction  
20 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -IN/azure/machine -learning/tutorial -azure -ml-in-a-
day?view=azureml -api-2 
21 
GCP Data 
Services  https://www.youtube.com/@googlecloudtech  
22 https://thecloudgirl.dev/sketchnote.html  
23 https://cloud.google.com/docs  
24 https://cloud.google.com/architecture  
25 
Power BI  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKTSLffVGbk  
26 https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/power -bi/fundamentals/power -bi-overview  
27 https://powerbi.microsoft.com/en -us/blog/  
28 https://powerbi.microsoft.com/en -my/search/community/  
29 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77jIzgvCIYY  
30 https://appsource.microsoft.com/en -us/marketplace/apps?product=power -bi-visuals  
31 https://www.perceptualedge.com/about.php  
32 https://daydreamingnumbers.com/blog/preattentive -attributes -example/  
33 https://www.storytellingwithdata.com/  
34 
Snowflake  https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql -reference -commands  
35 https://learn.snowflake.com/en/  
36 https://quickstarts.snowflake.com/  
37 https://www.snowflake.com/resource/7 -snowflake -reference -architectures -application -
builders/#main -content  
38 https://www.snowflake.com/en/data -cloud/pricing -options/  
 
B. N. M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Agentic Artificial Intelligence (PCI)  
SEMESTER – VII 
Course  Code  24AML171  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  2:0:2:0  SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  50 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Experiment with  the transition from static LLM prompting to autonomous Agentic AI, understand its 
core architecture and design aspects.  
 Apply  key agentic design patterns, tools use and context engineering to enable agents to solve complex, 
multi -step tasks autonomously.  
 Analyse  specialized frameworks like LangGraph to develop stateful and memory -aware agentic 
applications focusing on state management and short/long -term memory schemas  
 Design  multi -agent scenario, understand architecture and orchestration patterns, and cre ate workflows  
 Evaluate  agentic workflows by implementing observability and monitor agents' performance.  
Prerequisite : AI, Generative AI, Python programming  
 
Module 1:  INTRODUCTION TO AGENTIC AI  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Introduction to Agentic AI:  Defining AI Agents, Agent Characteristics, Agents vs. 
Assistants vs. Models, Types of Agents, Access to Generative Models and Selection, Use 
Cases and Applications, Agentic Workflows vs. Traditional Workflows, Agentic AI 
Frameworks;  
Designing Agentic AI S ystems:  Core Components (Models, Tools, Memory, 
Orchestration), Design Principles, Design Trade -offs, Architecture Design Patterns, User 
Experience Design - Interaction Modalities, Communication Models (synchronous and 
asynchronous), Context Retention and Continuity, Communicating Agent Capabilities;  
 
Practical:  
1. Create a minimal agent (a ‘Hello’ agent) that should be able to respond to generic 
questions and run it in both non -streaming and streaming mode.  
2. Create a simple customer support agent that should b e able to change the delivery 
address, cancel, refund for an order and confirm back to the user with all the 
updated details.  
  
10 
  
Apply  
 
Module 2:  TOOLS USE   
Tool types – Local Tools, APIs, Plug -ins, Model Context Protocol (MCP), Automated 
Tool Development; Orchestration – Agent Types (Reflex, ReAct, Planner -Executor, 
Query -Decomposition, Reflection and Deep Research), Tools Selection (Standard, 
Semantic and Hierarchical), Tools Execution, Topologies (Single, Parallel, Chains and 
Graph Execution) , Agents as Tools, Context Engineering; Human in the Loop (HITL);  10 Apply  
 
Practical:  
3. Create an agent with a set of standard tools with a foundation model for it to select 
appropriate tools for a given context.  
4. Implement an agent with API -based tools to enquire about additional 
information by performing web searches.  
5. Implement a simple MCP server that evaluates arithmetic expressions and 
provides weather information, and an agent to call appropriate tools exposed by 
the MCP server based on the user's message.  
Module 3:  KNOWLEDGE, MEMORY & LEARNING   
Knowledge & Memory:  Foundational Approaches to Memory – Context Windows, 
Full-text Search; Short -term Memory with Agent Context and Long -term Semantic 
Memory with RAG (vector stores); GraphRAG – Using Knowledge Graphs and Dynamic 
Knowledge Graph, Note -taking  
Learning in Agen tic Systems:  Non-parametric Learning – Exemplar learning, Reflexion 
and Experiential learning; Parametric Learning – Fine-tuning Models, Supervised Fine -
tuning, Direct Preference Optimization, Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable 
Rewards;  
 
Practical:  
6. Implement memory by integrating a standard in -memory context provider into an 
agent.  
7. Implement an agent that queries a knowledge graph to retrieve structured 
information against a user’s question, combines it with a foundation model and 
responds with contextually rich informed answers.  10 Analyze  
Module 4:  MULTI -AGENT SYSTEMS   
Introduction to Multi -agent System:  Single - vs. Multiagent Scenarios, Principles of 
Multi -agent Systems; Coordinations Patterns (Democratic, Manager, Hierarchical and 
Actor -Critic); Communication Technique – Local and Distributed (Agent -to-Agent 
protocol); Message Brokers and Event Buses; A utomated Design of Agent Systems 
(ADAS);  
Orchestration & Workflows:  Orchestration Patterns – Workflow as Deterministic 
Computation Graph (Sequential, Conditional and Parallel Execution) and Autonomous 
(Plan -based, Round -robin, Model -driven); Task Managemen t Patterns; Workflows with 
Serialization and Checkpointing;  
Practical:  
8. Build a system of multiple specialized agents, each equipped with appropriate 
tools, that collaborate to provide a solution for a relatively complex task around 
the supply -chain logisti cs domain.  
9. Build a multiagent multi -step workflow orchestration demonstrating task 
sequencing, retry handling and failure management ensuring durability and 
reliability of the workflows for a suitable use case.  10 Create  
Module 5:  EVALUATION & MONITORING   
 Evaluation:  Key Considerations in Evaluation -Driven Development, Enabling 
Observability for Evaluation, Answer Extraction from Trajectory, Multimodal 
Evaluation, Deterministic Metrics and LLM -judges, Reference -free and Reference -based 
Metrics, Scoring S trategies;  
Monitoring:  Monitoring Stacks and Selection; Instrumentation and Visualization, 
Monitoring Agent Performance (over error rate, latency, tool calls, cost, task completions 
and ethical metrics) and Scalability;  
 
Practical:  
10. Implement evaluation for  an appropriate autonomous multi -agent AI system 
against all relevant established evaluation metrics.  
11. Extend the above experiment to implement an appropriate optimization loop 
(measure -analyze -modify -validate) by adjusting parameters such as instructions, 
tools, and orchestration patterns.  
12. Implement observability with visualization in the above system using a right 
monitoring stack.  10 Evaluate  
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Build agents that connect to language models and support multi -turn conversations with user.  
2. Construct agents that follow different orchestration patterns and use appropriate types of tools including 
MCPs.  
3. Analyze the role of short -term and long -term memory and knowledge graphs in building context -aware 
AI agents.  
4. Create multi -agent systems by implementing orchestration as deterministic graphs or autonomous and 
establishing communication amongst themselves over sta ndard local and distributed protocols.  
5. Evaluate the performance and reliability of agentic AI workflows using observability, metrics, and 
visualization techniques.  
Reference Books  
1. Michael Albada. Building Applications with AI Agents: Designing and Implem enting Multiagent 
Systems , O'Reilly, 2025  
2. Victor Dibia. Designing Multi -Agent Systems: Principles, Patterns, and Implementation for AI Agents , 
2025  
3. Micheal Lanham. AI Agents in Action: Intelligent workflows with LLMs, MCP, A2A, and more , Second 
Edition, Manning, 2026.  
“Micheal Lanham. AI Agents in Action: Build, orchestrate, and deploy autonomous multi -agent 
systems , Manning, 2025“  
4. Valliappa Lakshmanan, Hannes Hapke.  Generative AI Design Patterns: Solutions to Common 
Challenges When Building GenAI Agents and Applications , O'Reilly, 2025  
5. The 2025 Guide to AI Agents: Your one -stop resource for gaining in -depth knowledge and hands -on 
applications of AI agents”. IBM, https://www.ibm.com/think/ai -agents  (accessed Jul. 08, 2025).  
6. Agent Framework documentation. Microsoft, https://learn.microsoft.com/en -us/agent -framework/  
(accessed May. 07, 2026)  
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved by  AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VII 
Reinforcement  Learning  (Professional Elective - III) 
Credit:  3 
Course Code  22AML172 13 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  3hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to 
 differential reinforcement learning with supervised and unsupervised learning, and analyze several 
methods of balancing exploitation and exploration,  
 formalize sequential decision -making using Markov decision processes (MDPs),  
 understand the algorithms of the dynamic programming (DP) to solve finite MDPs,  
 analyze Monte Carlo methods and its advantages over DP methods, and  
 get introduced to the temporal -difference learning method and its application to reinforcement  
learning problems.  
 Prerequisites: Data Science, Machine Learning, L inear Algebra, Probability, and Optimiz ation  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 
Introduction to Reinforcement Learning:  Introduction; Taxonomy of RL 
Approaches; Examples; Elements of Reinforcement Learning; Limitations 
& Scope; An Extended Example: Tic -Tac-Toe; Early History of 
Reinforcement Learning;  
 
Bandit Problems:  A k-armed Bandit Problem; Action -value Methods; The 
10-armed Testbed; Incremental Implementation; Tracking a Nonstationary 
Problem; Optimistic Initial Value; Upper -Confidence -Bound Action 
Selection; Gradient Bandit  Algorithm;  
 
Self-Study: Early History of Reinforcement Learning;  Associative Search 
(Contextual Bandits)  8 
 Analyze  
[CO1 ] 
Module -2 
Finite Markov Decision Processes:  Finite Markov decision processes 
(MDPs), The Agent -Environment Interface; Goals and Rewards; Returns and 
Episodes; Unified Notation for Episodic and Continuing Tasks; Policies and 
Value Functions; Bellman Equation; Optimal Policies and Optimal Value 
Funct ions;  
 
Self-Study: Optimality and Approximation;  8 Analyze  
[CO2]  
Module -3 
Dynamic Programming:  Policy Evaluation (Prediction Problem); Policy 
Improvement; Policy Iteration; Value Iteration; Asynchronous Dynamic 
Programming; Generalized Policy Iteration;  
 
Self-Study: Efficiency of Dynamic Programming;  8 Analyze  
[CO3]  
Module -4 
Monte Carlo Methods:  Monte Carlo Predictions; Monte Carlo Estimation 
for Action Values; Monte Carlo Control; Monte Carlo Control without 
Exploring Starts; Off -policy Prediction via Importance Sampling; 
Incremental Implementation; Off -policy Monte Carlo Control;  
 
Self-Study: *Discounting -aware Importance Sampling; *Per -decision 
Importance Sampling  8 Analyze  
[CO4]  
Module -5 
Temporal -Difference Learning:  Temporal -Difference (TD) Prediction; 
Advantages of TD Prediction Methods; Optimality of TD  (0); Sarsa : On -
policy TD Control; Q -learning: Off -policy TD Control; Expected Sarsa; 
Maximization Bias and Double Learning; Deep Q -Networks (DQN) – Deep 
RL, Deep Q -Learning;  
 
Self-Study: Games, Afterstates, and Other Special Cases;  Rainbow DQN;  8 Analyze  
[CO5]  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will  be able to 
1. analyze ε -greedy, upper -confidence -bound and gradient bandit methods to balance exploitation and 
exploration, and compare their performance under appropriate settings,  
2. formulating reinforce learning setup with well-defined  transition probabilities consisting of a finite 
MDP with finite state, action and reward sets,  
3. obtain optimal policies by finding optimal value functions satisfying Bellman optimality equations 
in dynamic programming  
4. analyze Monte Carlo method s to use it for direct learning by operating on sample experience without 
a model and bootstrapping, and  
5. analyze to differentiate temporal -difference learning method with Monte Carlo method and apply it 
to solve reinforcement learning problems.  
Reference  Books:  
 
1. Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction , Second Edition, 
MIT Press, 2018  
2. Marco Wiering and Martijn Van Otterlo. Reinforcement Learning: State of the Art , Springer, 
Adaptation, Learning, and Optimization, 2012  
3. Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming . 
Wiley, 2005  
4. D. P. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Neuro -Dynamic Programming . Athena Scientific, 1996.  
5. Phil Winder. Reinforcement Learning, O’Reilly, 2020  
6. Stuart Russel l and Peter Norvig. Reinforcement Learning, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach (pp. 812 - 845). Pearson, Fourth Edition, 2022  
7. Tom M. Mitchell. Reinforcement Learning, Machine Learning (pp. 367 - 390). McGraw -Hill, 1997  
8. Aurélien Géron. Reinforcement  Learning, Hands -on Machine Learning with Scikit -Learn , Keras, and 
TensorFlow (pp. 683 - 720), Third Edition, O’Reilly, 2022  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Blockchain Technology (Professional Elective –III)  
SEMESTER – VII 
Course  Code  24AML17243  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  3:0:0 :0 SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  40 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Conceptual understanding of the function of Blockchain as a method of securing distributed ledgers, 
how consensus on their contents is achieved, and the new applications that they enable.  
 Apply Blockchain operations as distributed data structures and deci sion-making systems, their 
functionality and different architecture types.  
 Evaluate existing “smart contract” capabilities and platforms, and examine  their future directions, 
opportunities, risks and challenges.  
Prerequisites: cryptography, data structures & programming, networks & distributed computing  
                      Module 1  Numb
er of 
Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
INTRODUCTION  
The Chain and the Longest Chain, Cryptocurrency to Blockchain , Permissioned Model 
of Blockchain, what  is Blockchain, Public Ledgers,  Blockchain as Public Ledgers, 
Block in a Blockchain, Transactions, Distributed Consensus, Cryptographic Hash 
Function, Properties of a hash functio n, Hash pointer and Merkle tree,  Digital Sig nature, 
Public Key Cryptography .                   
       
Self-Study Components: Type of nodes, Tokens, Gas, Various cryptocurrencies  8 
 
 Apply  
(CO1 ) 
 
Module 2   
Bitcoin and its Consensus -1 
A basic cryptocurrency, Creation of coins, Payments and double spending, Bitcoin P2P 
Network, Transaction in Bitcoin Network, Block Mining, Block propagation and block 
relay, Why Consensus, Distributed consensus in open environments, Consensus in a 
Bitcoin network.  
 
Self-Study Components: Ledger Design, SHA 128, SHA -256, SHA -512 8 
 
 
 
 Apply 
(CO2)  
Module 3   
Consensus -2 
Bitcoin Consensus, Proof of Work (PoW) – basic introduction, Hashcash PoW, Bitcoin 
PoW, Attacks on PoW and the monopoly problem , Proof of Stake, Proof of B urn and 
Proof of Elapsed Time, The life of a Bitcoin Miner, Mining Algorithm, Mining 
Difficulty, Mining Pool,  Permissioned  model and use cases.  
 8 
 
 Apply 
(CO3 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Self-Study Components: Delegated Proof of stake, Proof of Authority, RAFT, 
PAXOS  
Module 4   
Smart contracts:  
Smart contract introduction and implementation , Solidity Programming basics , 
Financial Services, Crowdfunding, Smart Property, Blockchain 2.0 Protocol Projects  
Wallet Development Projects, Blockchain Development Platforms and APIs. DApps, 
DOAs.  
 
Self-Study Components: Application design with smart contract in Remix IDE, 
Blockchain -as-a-Service (BaaS)  8 Analyze 
(CO4 ) 
 
Module 5   
Development Platforms  
Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric:  Transaction Flow, Hyperledger Fabric Details, Fabric – 
Membership and Identity Management, Hyperledger  Fabric Network Setup, Blockchain 
in Financial Service, Blockchain in Su pply, Blockchain in Government.  
 
Self-Study Components: Blockchain and smart contract vulnerabilities  8 
 Apply  
(CO5 ) 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Apply the concepts and structure of Blockchain to identify suitable deployment scenarios over a 
traditional distributed database.  
2. Apply Cryptographic functions to ensure the Blockchain properties to solve real time problems.  
3. Apply the Consensus me chanisms to find better solutions for the problems.  
4. Design and Analyze smart contracts,  its potential  usage  and its limitations . 
5. Design the Blockchain using any development platform along with test networks and supporting 
environment.  
Reference Books  
1. Blockchain by Melanie Swa, First edition, O’Reilly, 2015  
2. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Cryptocurrencies by Andreas Antonopoulos, First edition, 
O’Reilly, 2014.  
3. Zero to Blockchain - An IBM Redbooks course, by Bob Dill, David Smits, Redbook by IBM, 20 17. 
4. Hyperledger Fabric - https://www.hyperledger.org/projects/fabric.  
5. Practical Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain by Ganesh Prasad Kumble, Anantha Krishnan, 2020, 
Packt Publishing, ISBN: 9781838822293.  
B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved by  AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VII 
Predictive Analy tics & Business Intelligence (P rofessional Elective I II) 
Credit:  3 
Course Code  24AML17253  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  3hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students  to 
 Understand and apply techniques to forecast future outcomes and make data -driven decisions  
 Improve strategic decision making  in various business areas like marketing, sales, and operations . 
 Prerequisites: Basics of ML model workflow  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 
Decision Support: Introduction, Changing Business Environments,  
Computerized Decision Support, Managerial Decision Making, An Early 
Framework for Computerized Decision Support , Concepts of DSS.  
Foundations and technologies for Decision Making : Introduction and 
definitions of decision making, Phases of Decision making, how decisions are 
supported, Components of DSS .  
 
Self-study: Application Cases.  8 
  
CO1  
(Apply)  
Module -2 
Techniques for predictive modeling:  
Data Warehousing  Definitions and Concepts, Data Integration, Extraction, 
Transformation, and Load (ETL) . Data Mining concepts, data mining process, 
data mining methods and software tools.  Application  of neural network -based  
system, support vector machines and nearest neighbor method for prediction.  
 
Self-study: Text mining applications  and tools.  8 CO2  
(Analyze ) 
Module -3 
Web Analytics , Web Mining and Social Analytics:  Web Mining Overview, 
Web content and web structure mining, search engines, Search engine 
optimization, web analytics metrics and tools . Social Network Analysis  and 
its metrics , Introduction to social medi a, social media analytics .  
 
Self study: Application  Case s. 8     CO3     
  (Analyze ) 
Module -4 
Business Analytics:  A framework for Business Intelligence, Business 
Analytics overview. Business Reporting, Visual Analytics: Business 
Reporting Definitions and Concepts, Data and Information visualization, 
Different types of graphs and charts,  the Emergence of Data Visualization 
and Visual Analytics, Performance Dashboards using Tableau.  8 CO4   
(Analyze ) 
Case study: Saudi telecom company excels with Information visualization.  
Real time applications using BI tools: Tableau, Google looker studio.  
 
Self-study: Real time applications and use cases  
Module -5 
Emerging trends and Future Impacts of Business Analytics:  Location -
Based Analytics for Organizations, Analytics Applications for Consumers, 
Recommendation engines , Impacts of Analytics in Organizations, Issues in 
legality, privacy and ethics, An Overview of the Analytics Ecosystem.  
 
Self-study: cloud computing and BI  8 CO5     
(Apply)  
Course  outcomes:  
The students will  be able to 
1. Apply the basics of data and business to understand Decision Support systems  
2. Analyze Extraction, Transformation, and Load (ETL) processes and predictive modeling techniques for 
efficient data preparation and predictive analytics in business intelligence.  
3. Analyze web analytics and social media data to generate insights for business decision -making.  
4. Analyze data using Business Intelligence (BI) to ols and create interactive visualizations to support business 
decision -making.  
5. Apply emerging trends for strategic decision -making to improve  organizational performance.  
Reference  Books:  
1. “Business Intelligence and Analytics: Systems for decision support”, Ramesh Sharda, Dursun 
Delden, Efraim Turban, Pearson, 10th edition.  
2. Tableau Your Data!: Fast and Easy Visual Analysis with Tableau Software by  Dan Murray  
 
  Online Resources:  
1. https://tinyurl.com/ycyc3v4t   
2. https://www.tableau.com/products/tableau   
 
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER –VII 
MLOps  (PE-IV MOOC)  
Credit: 3 
Course  Code  24AML173 14 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week(L:T:P:J)  3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course  will enable  students to  
 Understand key MLOps principles for the deployment and management of machine learning 
models.  
 Set up and implement CI/CD pipelines tailored for ML workflows.  
 Learn strategies for monitoring and automatic retraining.  
 Gain hands -on experience with automation tools for scalable ML deployment.  
 Explore tools and methodologies for scaling ML pipelines in productio n environments.  
 
Python Prerequisites : Brush up on essential Python programming skills needed for building data science and 
MLOps pipelines  
 Number  
of 
Hours  Bloom'
s Level  
Module -1: MLOps: What and Why  
Why Now and Challenges:  Defining MLOps and Its challenges, MLOps to 
mitigate risk, MLOps for Responsible AI, MLOps  for scale  
Key MLOps Features:  A Premier on Machine Learning, Model Development, 
Productionalization and Deployment, Monitoring, Iteration Lifecycle , 
Governance  8   Apply  
Module -2: Python prerequisites and Version control  
Python Prerequisites: Generators In Python, Decorators In Python, Data  
Source Reading, Logging In Python, Logging With Multiple Loggers, Logging  
In a Real World Examples  
 
Version Control with Git & GitHub, Docker & Containerization , MLflow for 
Experiment Tracking, Data Version Cotrol ( DVC ) for Data Versioning, DVC for 
Data Versioning  8  
Apply  
 
Module -3:  
 DagsHub for Collaborative MLOps, Apache Airflow with Astro, CI/CD 
Pipeline with GitHub Actions, ETL Pipeline Implementation  8  
Apply  
 
Module -4: 
 End-to-End Machine Learning Project , End-to-End NLP Project with 
Huggingface, AWS SageMaker for ML Deployment  8  
Apply  
 
Module -5:  
 Gen AI with AWS Cloud , Monitoring with Grafana & PostgreSQL  
8  
Apply  
 
Course  Outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Understand and apply the key features of MLOps in Machine learning Model development  
2. Implement  MLFlow and DVC for model ver sioning and experiment tracking  
3. Experiment with  ETL pipelines and ML workflows  using Apache Airflow and Astro  
4. Develop end-to-end ML models wit h AWS SageMaker and Huggingface  
5. Monitor ML systems using Grafana and Po stgreSQL for real -time insights  
 
Reference  Books:  
 
1. Udemy course:  
https://www.udemy.com/course/complete -mlops -bootcamp -with-10-end-to-end-ml-
projects/learn/lecture/46093035  
2. "Introducing MLOps" : How to scale Machine Learning in the Enterprise , O'Reilly Media  by Mark 
Treveil & Alok Shukla  
 
  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER –VII 
Ethical  Hacking  (PE-IV MOOC)  
Credit: 3 
Course  Code  24AML17344  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week(L:T:P:J)  3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
1. Mastery of Ethical Hacking Fundamentals  
2. Proficiency in Information Gathering and Scanning Techniques  
3. Expertise in Penetration Testing and Wireless Security  
4. Advanced Exploitation and Scripting Skills  
5. Development and Application of Malware and Security Tools.  
Prerequisites:  Basic computer and networking knowledge, programming and scripting skills, familiarity with 
operating systems and security concepts, foundational math and logic  and awareness of cyber security threats, and 
ethical considerations.  
 Number  
of Hours  Bloom’s  
Level  
Module 1: Introduction to Ethical Hacking and Environment Setup  
 Introduction and Installation:  Kali Linux in a Virtual Machine Setup, Virtual 
Box Installation, Kali Linux Installation, Enabling Full Screen.  
 Basic Linux Commands .  
 Creating a Secure Hacking Environment : Changing IP address and wireless 
adapter setup, creating a bootable Kali USB drive, Essential networking terms, 
Essential hacking terms, Additional Kali tools to install, Changing our MAC 
address with macchanger .  
 Footprinting : Google hacking, Nikto basic s, Whois tool, Email harvesting, 
Shodan, Zone transfer with Dig  
 Scanning : Nmap part 1, 2 and 3, Zenmap, TCP scans , Nmap bypassing defences 
Nmap scripts part 1  and 2.  
 Self Study: Master Linux commands, configure secure Kali Linux environment, 
and practice reconnaissance using footprinting and scanning tools.  8  Apply  
(CO1)  
 
Module -2 Website and Network Secur ity 
 Website Penetration Testing : Installing OWASP , HTTP request , HTTP response , 
Burpsuite configuration , editing packets in Burpsuite , Whatweb and Dirb, Password 
recovery attack , Burpsuite login bruteforce , Hydra login bruteforce , Session fixation , 
Injection attacks ,  
 Finding blind command injection, SQL basics, Manual SQL injection part 1 and 2, 
SQLmap basics, XML injection, Installing XCAT and prev enting injection attacks, 
Reflected XSS, Stored XSS, Changing HTML code with XSS, XSSer and XSSsniper.  8 Apply  
(CO2)  
Simple command injection , Exploiting command injection vulnerability  Wireless 
Cracking : Wireless attacking theory, Enabling monitor mode, Capturing hand shake with 
airodump, RockYou.txt, Cracking with Aircrack, Cracking with Hashcat, Creating 
password lists with Crunch, Creating password lists with Cupp, Rainbow tables part 1 
and 2, Installing Fluxion, Finding and cracking hidden networks, Preventing wirel ess 
attacks  
 Self Study:  Explore website penetration testing techniques, practice injection attacks, and 
learn wireless network cracking and password attacks.  
Module -3: Network Attacks and System Hacking  
 Man in the Middle Attacks :  Problems while installing MITMf , HTTP traffic sniffing , 
DNS spoofing and HTTPS password sniffing , Hooking browsers with BEEF , 
Screenshotting targets browser , Cloning any webpage , Ettercap basics .ARP protocol 
basics , Man in the middle attack theory , Installing MITMf , Manual ARP spoofing , 
 System Hacking with Metasploit : MSFconsole environment, Metasploit modules 
explained, Bruteforcing SSH with Metasploit, Attacking Tomcat with Metasploit, Getting 
Meterpreter with command injection, PHP code injection, 2 Metasploitabl e exploits, 
Wine installation, Creating Windows payloads with Msfvenom, Encoders and Hex editor, 
Windows 10 Meterpreter shell, Meterpreter environment, Windows 10 privilege 
escalation, Preventing privilege escalation, Post exploitation modules, Getting 
Meterpreter over Internet with port forwarding, Eternalblue exploit, Persistence module, 
Hacking over the internet with Ngrok, Android device attack with Venom . 
 Self Study: Understand man -in-the-middle attacks and master Metasploit 
framework for system exploi tation and post -exploitation tasks.  8  
Analyze  
(CO3)  
 
Module -4: Exploitation and Scripting  
Coding an Advanced Backdoor : Theory behind reverse shells , Simple server code , 
Connection with reverse shell , Sending and receiving messages , Sending messages with  
while true loop , Executing commands on target system , Fixing backdoor bugs and adding 
functions , First test using our backdoor , Trying to connect every 20 seconds , Creating 
persistence part 1 and 2 , Changing directory , Uploading and downloading files , 
Dow nloading files from the internet , Starting programs using our backdoor , Capturing 
screenshot on the target PC , Embedding backdoor in an image part 1 and 2, Checking for 
administrator privileges.  
 Python Crash Course:  Variables, Raw input, If -else statements , for loops, while loops, 
Python lists, Functions, Classes, importing libraries, Files in Python, Try and except rule.  
 
Self Study: Learn to code, test, and enhance advanced reverse shell backdoors with 
persistence, file operations, and privilege managemen t. 8  
Apply  
(CO4)  
 
Module -5: Malware Development and Career Guidance  
 Creating a Keylogger for the Backdoor : Adding  report function , writing  keystrokes to 
a file , Adding the keylogger to our reverse shell part 1 and 2 . 
Basic Authentication Brute forcer : Printing banner, adding  available options, starting  
threads for brute force , writing  function to run the attack, Brute forcing  router login, 
Bypassing antivirus with your future programs, Sending malware with spoofed email , 
Importing Pynput , Simple keylogg er 
BONUS - Building a Career in Cyber Security  
Self Study: Develop keyloggers and brute force tools, practice malware delivery 
techniques, and explore career paths in cybersecurity.  8  
Apply  
(CO5)  
 
Course  outcomes:  
The students will be  able to 
1. Applying fundamental ethical hacking concepts, including secure setup, Linux commands, and principles.  
2. Construct effective foot printing  and scanning techniques to identify vulnerabilities and gather critical information.  
3. Analyze and d evelop skills in website penet ration testing and wireless security cracking to assess and exploit 
vulnerabilities in web applications and networks.  
4. Build and utilize advanced tools for system exploitation, including Metasploit, and develop scripting and malware 
techniques to enhance et hical hacking skills.  
5. Implement advanced security tools like backdoors and keylogger , applying these skills to real -world scenarios 
while understanding ethical implications and career opportunities.  
Reference  Books:  
https://www.udemy.com/course/ethical -hacking -kali-linux/?couponCode=IND21PM  
 
 
 
 
   B.N.M.  Institute  of Technology  
An Autonomous  Institution  under  VTU,  Approved  by AICTE  
Department  of Artificial  Intelligence  and Machine  Learning  
SEMESTER  – VII 
                                             R Programming  (PE-IV MOOC)  
                                                                    Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML17354  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total  Number  of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:   
This course  will enable  students to 
 Learn R programming language, data science.  data types, vectors, Matrices  and Functions.  
 Apply and analyze the problems using Intermediate R &  Data Manipulation techniques . 
 Study  the Data Visualization in R by plotting, mappi ng, reports  creation . 
 Introduction to Machine Learning, Linear  Regression techniques and Data Processing.  
 Understanding Linear and Logistic Regression and applying R program in real life.  
 Prerequisites: Basic knowledge of programming  
Modules  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1: Intro duction , Getting Started with R , Data Types and Structure in R  
Data Science and Machine Learning Course Intro : Intro,  what is Data Science? ML 
Overview, Data science + Machine Learning Marketplace, DS and ML Job 
Opportunities.  
Getting Started with R:  started with R,  R basics,  working with Files,  R Studio,  
Tidyverse Overview,  Additional Resources.  
Data Types and Structure in R:  overview,  Basic Types,  Vector part 1 &2,vector 
missing values, Coerction,  Naming,  Misc. ,working with matrices,  working with Lists,  
Introduction to Data Frames,  Creating Data Frames, Data frames:  Helper Functions, 
Tibbles.                               
 
 
8  
 
 
(CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Intermediate R,  Data Manipulation in R  
Intermediate R:  Intro,  Relational Operators,  Logical , Operators,  Conditional 
Statements,  working with Loops, Functions,  Packages,  Factors,  Data & Times,  
Functional Programming,  Data Import/Export,  Working with Databases.  
Data Manipulation in R : Intro,  Tidy Data,  The Pipe Operator,{dplyr}:The Filter Verb,  
Mutate verb,  Arrange Verb,  Summarize Verb   
8  
(CO2)  
Apply  
Module -3: Data Manipulation in R , Data Visualization in R  
  Data Manipulation in R:continue: Data Pivoting:{tidyr},String Manipulation;{stringr},Web   
  Scraping:{rvest},JSON Parsing:{jsonlite}.   
Data Visualization in R: Intro duction , getting started with Data Visualization in R,  Aesthetics 
Mappings,  Single variable Plots,  Two variable Plots,  Facets,  Layering  and Cordinate systems,  
Styling and Saving.  
Creating Reports with R Markdown: Introduction to R Markdown.   
8  
(CO3)  
Analyze  
Module -4: Introduction to Machine Learning, Data Preprocessing, Linear Regression  
Building webapps with R Shiny: Introduction to R Shiny,  Creating A basic R Shiny App,  
Other Examples with R Shiny.  
Introduction to Machine Learning: Introduction to ML part 1 & part 2  
Data Preprocessing: Data Processing Intro duction , Explanation -1hr 
Linear Regression:  A simple Model: LR: Simple Model Intro duction , Explanation    
8 (CO4)  
Apply  
Module -5: Linear  Regression, Logistics Regression  
Exploratory Data Analysis:  Intro duction , Hands -on Exploratory Data Analysis  
Linear  Regression – Real Model:  Intro duction , LR Real Model  
Logistics Regression: Introduction,  Logistic Regression in R  
Starting A career in Data Science: Starring a Data Science Career Overview,  creating  a Data 
Science Resume,  getting  started with Freelancing,  Top Freelancing Websites,  Personal 
Branding,  Networking Do’s and Don’ts, Setting Up a website .  
 
 
8  
 
(CO5)  
Analyze  
 
 Course  outcomes:  
 
1. Understand  and apply the R Programming concepts , data typ es, functions , Packages and  work with 
Database . 
2. Experiment with Data Manipulation  techniques using Dplyr and Tidyr  . 
3. Study and analyze  Data Visualization techniques, mapping , plotting and creating Reports  
4. Build webapps and make use of  Machine Learning and Linear Regression model  and Data Preprocessing.  
5. Apply Logistic  Regression and analyze data for real world problem solving.  
  
 
Reference  Books:  
1. https://www.udemy.com/course/data -science -and-machine -learning -with-r-from -a-z/?couponCode=OF83024F  
2. Data Science and Machine Learning with R by Reema Thareja, Mc Graw Hill,1st Edition 2021  
3. https ://bookdown.org/rdpeng/rprogdatascience/  
4. MachineLearningR__Brett_Lantz.pdf  by research gate network.  
 
B.N.M. Institute of Technology  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VII 
 Research Methodology & Intellectual Property Rights (AEC)  
Credit: 2  
Course  Code  24AML174  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  2:0:0:0  SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  25 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Understand the basics of research methodology and apply Ethics in conducting research work  
 Analyze the concept of Literature Review, Technical Reading and writing, Attributions and 
Citations while preparing a technical report  
 Learn the concepts of Intellectual Property Rights and analyze and apply methods of filing 
and p ublishing a patent.  
 Analyze the knowledge of different categories of Intellectual Property Rights for copyrights, 
trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical Indication  
 No. of 
Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 
Introduction:  Meaning of Research, Objectives of Engineering Research, and 
Motivation in Engineering Research, Types of Engineering Research, Finding 
and Solving a Worthwhile Problem.  
Ethics: Ethics in Engineering Research Practice, Types of Research 
Misconduct, Ethical Issues Related to Authorship.  
Self study: Key Principles of Engineering Ethics in Research  5 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2 
Literature Review and Technical Reading:  New and Existing Knowledge, 
Bibliographic Databases --- Web of Science, Google Scholar, Introduction to 
Technical Reading, Taking notes.  
Attributions and Citations:  Citations: Functions and Attributes, Impact of 
Title and Keywords on Citations, Knowledge Flow through Citation -- Citing 
Datasets, Styles for Citations, Acknowledgments and Attributions, What 
Should Be Acknowledged, Acknowledgments in Books, Dissertations.  5 (CO2)  
Analyze  
 
Technical Writing and Publishing:  Attributes and Reasons of Technical 
Writing, Patent or  Technical Paper? Writing Strategies, Journal Paper: 
Structure and Approach, Publish Articles to Get Cited or Perish.  
Self study: Book chapter writing  
Module -3 
Introduction To Intellectual Property:  Role of IP in the Economic and 
Cultural Development of the Society, IP as a Global Indicator of Innovation,  
Major Amendments in IP Laws and Acts in India . 
 
Building Intellectual Property Rights: Codes and Standards, Patents: Subject 
and Importance, Requirements for Patentability, Application Preparation and 
Filing, Patents and Commercialization in Academia.  
 
Case Studies on Patents:  Case study of Curcuma (Turmeric) Patent, Case 
study of Neem Patent, Case study of Basmati patent.  
Self study: Other related patent study  5 (CO3)  
Analyze  
 
Module -4  
Copyrights and Related Rights:  Classes of Copyrights. Criteria for 
Copyright. Ownership of Copyright. Copyrights of the Author. Copyright 
Infringements. Fair Use Doctrine. Copyrights and Internet. Non -Copyright 
Work. Copyright Registration. Interesting Copyrights Cases.  
Trademarks: Eligibility Criteria. Who Can Apply for a Trademark. Acts and 
Laws. Designation of Trademark Symbols. Classification of Trademarks. 
Registration of a Trademark is Not Compulsory. Validity of Trademark.  
Trademark Registry. Process for Trademarks Registrati on -- Prior Art Search. 
Famous Case Law: Coca -Cola Company vs. Bisleri International Pvt. Ltd.   
 
Self study: Related case studies on Copyrights  5 (CO4)  
Analyze  
 
Module -5 
Industrial Designs: Eligibility Criteria. Acts and Laws to Govern Industrial 
Designs. Design Rights. Enforcement of Design Rights. Non -Protectable 
Industrial Designs India. Protection Term. Procedure for Registration of 
Industrial Designs -- Prior Art Search, Application for Registration. 
Application Forms. Classification of Indust rial Designs. Famous Case Law: 
Apple Inc. vs. Samsung Electronics Co.  
Geographical Indications:  Acts, Laws and Rules Pertaining to GI. Ownership 
of GI. Rights Granted to the Holders. Registered GI in India. Identification of 
Registered GI. Classes of GI. N on-Registerable GI. Protection of GI. Procedure 
for GI Registration Documents Required for GI Registration. Famous Case 
Law: Banglar Rasogolla Vs. Odisha Rasogolla   
Self study: Famous GI examples  5 (CO4)  
Analyze  
 
Course  outcomes:   
1. Understand types of research methodologies and apply Ethics in conducting research work  
2. Examine and analyze Literature Review, Technical Reading & writing, Attributions, and 
Citations while preparing a technical report  
3. Analyze the significance of Intellectual Property Rights,  patentability requirements, and patent 
commercialization strategies in fostering innovation and technological advancement.  
4. Differentiate and analyze various forms of intellectual property protection, including copyrights 
and trademarks, with respect to ow nership, infringement, registration procedures, and legal 
implications.  
5. Demonstrate the ability to prepare research papers, patents and copyright following ethical and 
academic standards.  
Reference Books:  
 
1. Dipankar Deb, Rajeeb Dey, Valentina E. Balas “ Engineering Research Methodology”, ISSN 1868 - 
4394 ISSN 1868 -4408 (electronic), Intelligent Systems Reference Library, ISBN 978 -981-13- 2946 -3 
ISBN 978 -981-13-2947 -0 (eBook), https://doi.org/10.1 007/978 -981-13-2947 -0  
2. Intellectual property A primer for Academia, Prof. Rupinder Tewari, Ms. Mamta Bhardwaj, 
Publication Bureau, Panjab University, ISBN: 81 -85322 -92-9, Edition: 2021.  
 
 
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VIII 
 Cognitive Science  (PE-V MOOC)  
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML1 8115  CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Become familiar with the foundational theories of cognitive science  
 Learn the principles and concepts of AI, machine learning and neural networks  
 Analyze natural language processing and robotics  
 Connect AI systems to human cognitive functions  
 Address ethical considerations in AI development  
Prerequisites: Fundamental s of AI, ML, NLP  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1:  
Introduction : foundation of cognitive science , neuroscience & the brain , 
perception & sensation, memory & learning, language and cognition. Case 
study.   
History and fundamental theory of cognitive science : Introduction to 
cognitive science , historical foundation of cognitive science, core theories in 
cognitive science , interdisciplinary approaches in cognitive science, recent 
advances in  cognitive science, Case study.  
Key contributors to cognitive s cience : foundational thinkers of cognitive 
science , Pioneers of AI, influential  theorist  in cognitive psychology, 
neuroscientific contributors to cognitive theory , interdisciplinary innovators in 
cognitive science, case study.  8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2:  
Understanding human perception : introduction to human perc eption , 
sensory systems and their functions, perception and attention, cognitive 
processes in perception, advanced topics in human perception, case study.  
Memory and cognitive processes : introduction to memory and cognitive 
processes , encoding & storage of information, retrieval mechanism and 
memory recall, cognitive load and information processing, advanced topics in 
cognitive processes, case study.  
Language and human cognition : introduction to language & cognition, the 
neural basis of language processing, language acquisition & development, 8 (CO2)  
Apply  
language comprehension & production, the relationship between language and 
thought, case study.  
Module -3:  
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence : fundamentals of AI , key conce pts in 
Machine Learning, Introduction to Neural Networks, supervised and 
unsupervised learning, applications of AI in real world, case study.   
Machine Learning fundamentals : Introduction to Machine Lear ning, 
Supervised learning concepts, unsupervised learning techniques, model 
evaluation & validation , Case study.  
Neural networks and their applications : Introduction to Neural networks, 
key components and architecture of NN, training NN & backpropagation, 
advanced NN models & techniques, applications of NN in Real world 
scenarios.  8 (CO3 ) 
Apply  
Module -4: 
Natural Language Processing  in AI: Introduction to NLP, text processing & 
tokenization, understanding word embeddings  & vector representations, 
sequence models & recurrent ne ural networks, advanced NLP applications & 
case study.  
Robotics in cognition science : Introduction to robotics & cognitive science, 
fundamentals  of Robot design & control, basics of AI in robotics, co gnitive 
architectures & their applications, advanced topics in human robot interaction. 
Case Study.  
Hands on projects and Experimental learning : Introduction to project -based 
learning, basic technique s for experimental lea rning, intermediate project 
design, advanced strategies for collaborative projects, capsto ne projects & 
reflective learning, case study.   8 (CO4 ) 
Apply  
Module -5:  
Interdisciplinary collaboration in AI and cognitive science : foundations 
of AI  & cognitive science , exploring the intersection of AI & human 
cognition, methods & tools for cross disciplinary research, future directions 
in interdisciplinary AI & cognitive science, case study . 
Ethical con sideration in AI development : Introduction to ethics in AI, 
privacy & data protection in AI, Bias & Fairness in ML, accountability & 
transparency in AI systems, AI governance & regulatory frameworks, case 
study.  
Emerging trends and future directions in AI and cognitive science : 
Introduction to emerging trends in AI & cognitive science, advances in 
machine  learning & deep learning, Integration of AI & neuroscience, ethical 
considerations & societal impacts of AI, future directions & innovations in 
cognitive computing, case study.   8 (CO5 ) 
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be  able to  
1. Apply foundational concepts of cognitive science, encompassing its historical evolution, core 
theories, interdisciplinary approaches, and applications in multi ple fields.  
2. Apply theories of perception, memory, cognitive processes, and language to practical situations.  
3. Apply theoretical knowledge and practical skills in AI, Machine Learning, and neural networks 
to real-world case studies.  
4. Apply the concepts of NLP and Robotics  from cognitive science perspective . 
5. Apply  interdisciplinary approaches to address AI and cognitive science challenges and evaluate 
the societal and ethical impacts of AI advancements . 
Online references:  
1. https://www.udemy.com/course/ai -cognitive -science -bridging -minds -and-machines/  
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/philosophy -cognitive -sciences/home/info   
3. https://learning.edx.org/course/course -v1:EPFLx+BIO465.2x+2T2018/home   
4. https://neuronaldynamics.epfl.ch/online/index.html   
 
 
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Reverse Engineering & Malware Analysis  (PE-V MOOC)  
Credit - 3 
SEMESTER – VIII  
Course  Code  24AML18145  CIE Marks:  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J)  3:0:0:0  SEE Marks:  50 
Total Number of Lecture Hours  40 SEE Duration:  3 Hours  
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
 Introduced with the tools and techniques used in reverse engineering and malware analysis, 
specifically focusing on Ghidra, binary analysis, and file structures.  
 Provide foundational knowledge of Linux, its terminal, file structure, and commands necessary for 
malware analysis and reverse engineering.  
 Enhance students' understanding of C++ concepts and programming, particularly in relation to reverse 
engineering and malware analysis.  
 Develop proficiency in handling pointers, functions, and object -oriented co ncepts in C++ for reverse 
engineering tasks.  
 Provide a deep dive into Abstract Data Types (ADT) and node -based structures in C++ for analyzing 
and manipulating complex data types in malware analysis.  
Prerequisites: Basic knowledge of programming, cybersecurity and OS  
Module 1:  Introduction  Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Introduction:  Downloading Ghidra and File Structure, Installing JDK in Linux, 
Installing JDK in Windows or MacOS, opening project in Ghidra, Discovering Ghidra  
Malware Analysis and Reverse Engineering with G hidra,  
Binary Analysis:  Analysis of Binary and 4 Stages of Compilation, Preprocessing, 
Compilation Phase, Assembly Phase, Linking Phase Symbols, Stripped and Not 
Stripped Binaries. Linux - ELF Format, Windows  - PE Format, Learning the Windows 
PE Format, IDA Pro / IDA Freeware, Linux for Reverse Engineering and Malware 
Analysis.  08 
 (CO1)  
Apply  
 
Module 2:   Starting with Linux Terminal   
Starting with Linux Terminal:  Understanding Key Concepts, Finding Helpful 
Manuals, Understanding Linux Directories, Linux Directories - Part 2, Starting with 
Linux shell and Exploring Linux Systems, Permissions, Managing Processes and 
Packages in Linux:  Fundamentals of Processes in Sy stem, The Magic with PS Aux 
Command, The Magic with TOP Command, Foreground and Background Processes, 
From Background to Foreground, The Tutorial with Linux Process Signals, 
Introduction to Packet Management Systems, Why we need package management 
tools, P ackage Management in Linux - Final, Trcrt command, Networking with Linux.  08 
 
 
 (CO2) 
Apply  
 
Module 3:   C++ for Reverse Engineering:   
C++ for Reverse Engineering:  CPP Newlines, Tabs and Spaces, Initializers in CPP, 
CPP Writing Styles, Statements and Expressions, RVALUE and LVALUE, Comma, 
Types and Variables, Literals in CPP, Defining Constants, Const Expressions, 
Beginning to Pointers, Namespaces in CPP, Scoping Va riables and Static Keyword, 08 
 
 (CO3) 
Apply  
 
 
 
 Conditional Statements, Variable Types in C/C++, Reverse Engineering and C: 
Introduction to CPP Classes, Pointers and Arrays, Pointers and Arrays  
Module 4:   Pointers  and Functions/ Reverse Engineering and Malware Analysis   
Pointers in Practice, Pointers in Practice - Part 2, Pointers in Practice - Part 3, Pointers 
in Practice - Part 4, Introduction to Functions, Functions - Part 1, Functions - Part 2, 
Functions - Part 3, Functions - Part 4, Functions - Part 5, Functions - Part 6, Functions 
- Part 7, Introduction to Basic CPP Programming, Creating Random Card Generator 
Using Enum and rand, Developing Main Function and Using static_cast, Introduction 
to ADT, Creating ADT Class and Using Constructors, Virtual Methods and 
Overrid ing from Class, Controlling Copy Operations with ADT, Starting with 
Templates, Class Templates in CPP, Introduction to STL, Algorithm Analysis, 
Scenario Analysis, Developing Main, Factorial Method.  08 (CO4) 
Apply  
 
Module 5:   ADT and nodes in C++ for Reverse Engineering   
Creating List ADT : Developing Get and Insert Methods, Developing Search and 
Remove Methods, Testing ADT List, Node and Chaining Example, Creating and 
Chaining Nodes with Different Data Types, Creating Custom Linked List, Get 
Method, D eveloping InsertHead, InsertTail and Insert Methods, Developing Search 
Operation, Removing Items.  
Arrays for Reverse Engineering and Malware Analysis:  Understanding Arrays, 
Manipulating Arrays, Starting with Array Pointers, Pointer Increment vs Array 
Index ing. 08 
 (CO5) 
Apply  
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Understand and Apply Ghidra for malware analysis and reverse engineering tasks, including binary 
analysis and file structure identification.  
2. Utilize Linux terminal effectively for system exploration, process management, and networking tasks 
related to reverse engineering.  
3. Design and debug C++ programs, including understanding key concepts such as pointers, arrays, 
functions, and classes, for reverse engineer ing purposes.  
4. Apply advanced C++ techniques such as ADTs, templates, and object -oriented programming to solve 
reverse engineering problems.  
5. Develop and manipulate custom data structures like linked lists and arrays, and understand how they 
can be used in reverse engineering and malware analysis scenarios.  
References  
1. https://www.udemy.com/course/reverse_engineering/?srsltid=AfmBOoolqHTZDPJuRs62cQwkBq7Te
6zw6vVkjq6PfYv3jL9xXeEx2CFk&couponCode=NVDIN35  
2. Practical Malware Analysis: The Hands -On Guide to Dissecti ng Malicious Software Michael Sikorski, 
Andrew Honig No Starch Press, 1 Feb 2012.  
3. Learning Malware Analysis: Explore the concepts, tools, and techniques to analyze and investigate 
Windows malware Paperback by Monnappa K a, Packt Publishing, 29 June 2018.  
4. Malware Analysis and Detection Engineering: A Comprehensive Approach to Detect and Analyze 
Modern Malware Paperback, by Abhijit Mohanta, Anoop Saldanha, 23 September 2020.  
An Autonomous Institution under VTU, Approved by AICTE  
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
SEMESTER – VIII  
 Graph Neural Networks  (PE-V MOOC ) 
Credit:  3 
Course  Code  24AML18 155 CIA Marks  50 
Teaching  Hours/Week  (L: T: P: J) 3:0:0:0 SEA  Marks  50 
Total Number of Lecture  Hours  40 Exam  Hours  03 
Course  Learning  Objectives:  
This course will enable students to  
  Understand the fundamental concepts of Graph Theory and their application in Machine Learning.  
  Learn about different types of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and their use cases.  
  Gain knowledge about using GNNs and ANN for solving real world problems.  
 Deep understanding of advanced GNN optimization models in various GNN Applications  
Prerequisite s: 
Fundamentals of Graph Theory  and CNN.  
 Number 
of Hours  Bloom’s 
Level  
Module -1 Introduction to Graphs & Traditional Graph Algorithms  
Overview of Graphs : Definition of graphs - nodes, edges, adjacency ma trix, and 
graph representations, Types of graphs - directed vs. undirected, weighted vs. 
unweighted, bipartite graphs, Implementation of different graphs using 
TensorFlow  
Graph Traversal Algorithms -Depth -First Search (DFS), Breadth -First Search 
(BFS) , Implementation of DFS and BFS using tensorflow  
Graph Shortest Path Algorithms -Dijkstra’s Algorithm, Bellman -Ford, 
Implementation using tensorflow  
Self Study : Components:  Implementation of different graphs, DFS,  BFS, 
Dijkstra's  , Bellman - Ford algorithms using Tensorflow.  
 8 (CO1)  
Apply  
Module -2: Neural Network & Graph Neural Networks  
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) -Basics of CNNs: convolutions, 
pooling, and applications in image processing.  
Introduction to Graph Neural Networks -What is a Graph Neural Ne twork? 
Motivations and benefits, Comparing GNNs to traditional neural networks and 
CNNs.  
Message Passing Framework -Explanation of the message passing mechanism: 
aggregation, update, and combination, Neighborhood aggregation and node 
embeddings.  
 
Self Study Components: The GNN and Message Passing frameworks 
implementation using Tensorflow.  8 (CO2)  
Apply  
Module -3: Key GNN Models  
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) - Architecture and layers of GCNs, 
Mathema tical formulation and operation, GCN for node classification.  
Graph  SAGE (Graph Sample and Aggregation)  - Localized N eighborhood 
aggregation, Sampling techniques and their importance for scalability.   
Graph Attention Networks (GAT) - Self-attention mechanism in graphs, Node -
wise attention in the aggregation process.  
Self Study Components: Implementation of the Graph Attention Network 
(GAT)  using TensorFlow  with the Spektral  library  8 (CO3)  
Apply  
Module -4: Advanced Topics in GNNs  
Graph Pooling Techniques -Pooling methods: Global Average Poolin g, Top -K 
Pooling, DiffPool,  The role of pooling in graph classification tasks.  
Graph Autoencoders -GNNs for unsupervised learning, Applications in graph 
reconstruction and anomaly detection.  
Graph Generative Models -Generative approaches for graph creation and data 
synthesis, Variational Graph Autoencoders (VGAE).  
 
Self Study Components: Implementation of Variational Graph Autoencoder 
(VGAE)  using PyTorch  with the PyTorch Geometric  library  8 (CO4)  
Apply  
Module -5: Optimization and Applications of GNNs  
Optimization Techniques for GNNs -Gradient descent a nd variants: Adam, 
RMSProp . 
Node Classification  Application - Use cases in social networ ks, 
recomm endation systems.  
Link Prediction Application -Predicting edges in a graph for applications like 
social network growth or fraud detection.  
Self Study Components: Implement and optimize various GNN applications 
using Adam and RMSprop optimizers in PyTorch/Tensorflow.  
 8 (CO5)  
Apply  
Course  outcomes:   
The students will be able to  
1. Apply graph  traversal  and shortest path algorithms  in Machine Learning  Applications . 
2. Explore  different types of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and their use cases.  
3. Apply ANN architectures for Graph reconstructions and anomaly det ection  
4. Apply advanced GNN models for solving problems in fields such as social networks, 
recommendation systems, and bioinformatics.  
5. Analyze GNN Optimization  techniques  in various GNN applications . 
Reference Books:  
1. Graph Representation Learning  by William L. Hamilton  
2. Deep Learning on Graphs  by Yao Ma and Jure Leskovec  
3. Machine Learning with Graphs  by Xavier Bresson and Thomas Laurent  
 